PROLOGUETHE SCARLET MOON Iwoke up hungry on the morning of the Scarlet Moon. It wasn’t unusual. As far as I could remember, I rarely ever went to sleep with a full belly. The cravings tormented me in my waiting hours and sleep granted me little respite, for I had dreamed of the Nightlords, whose bloody tribute was due today. They appeared in my nightmares as great winged shadows to carry me away screaming to the Blood Pyramid. Teachers and adults said that tributes should be proud of feeding a God-in-the-Flesh, but I knew better. I had only ever seen terror in the sacrifices’ eyes as the priests dragged them to the altar. Would I be chosen tonight? I had finally reached the age of seventeen a few moons ago. Youth was no longer my shield. Eztli’s gentle voice shook me out of my dark mood. “Morning, sleepyhead. Come on, wake up.” “I’m awake.” I groaned and turned in my bed. The house’s door was open. The light outside filtered through the entrance and hurt my eyes. Thankfully, Eztli’s shadow loomed over me. She was already fully clothed, with a red sash holding her cotton skirt and blouse together. Her father, Guatemoc, was still snoring in his bed, so it couldn’t be that early. “Is it breakfast time?” “It’s bathing time.” She threw my cotton garment at my face with a laugh. “Come on, before Mother scolds us.” It was with a heavy heart that I followed her outside. The river ran close to our house of earth and mud, its water fresh in the morning. Eztli’s mother, Necahual, was outside breaking down flowers into healing powder. She smiled at her daughter and ignored me utterly. I was fine with her disdain. It was her attention that I dreaded. “Beneath the contempt, the bitter fear,” the wind whispered into my ear. I ignored it. Eztli and I were as different as light and day. Eztli was short but fit, a beautiful young woman with bronze skin, long black hair, and eyes that seemed sculpted from the purest amber. Boys fought over Eztli’s attention, and a few had already asked her father for her hand. Meanwhile, people saw me as a curiosity at best and an aberration at worst. I was surprisingly tall for my age, but a childhood of starvation had left me gaunt and emaciated. My hair was short, white, and lifeless. My pale blue eyes were like the winter sky. Even my brown skin was the lightest shade most people had ever seen. I imagined my late father, in his infinite wisdom, thought himself clever when he called me Iztac—the White. Leaving my garments on the side of the river, I dove into the water. Eztli followed after me naked and immediately splashed me with a laugh. Since she had opened hostilities, I ferociously retaliated with a wave of my hand, sending water all over her face. There were other boys and girls upstream playing together under the watchful eye of their mothers. Our battle inspired them to go to war with splashes and waves as well. I often looked at the older girls’ bodies with appreciation, but Eztli always punished my inattention with a surprise attack. My dearest rival won that round in the end, but I didn’t mind. We both had fun. “The festivities begin at noon,” Eztli said after we reached a truce. “Do you think we should watch the ball game or the singers?” “Neither,” I replied as I cleaned my face. A breeze coming from the northern woods brushed against my face. It was surprisingly warm for the winter solstice. “I won’t attend.” She frowned at me, displeased. “Why?” “Because your gods are false,” the wind whispered to me. “No true deity would wither away before the shining dawn. The stars themselves recoil from true darkness.” “I don’t want to feel guilty.” There were so many captives this year that the red-eyed priests had to put a sacrifice to the knife twice a minute. “We shouldn’t rejoice while people die.” Eztli sat on a stone near the riverbank. “They are war captives, Iztac. Our enemies.” “I can think of one exception.” She looked at me with worry, and I immediately guessed what bothered her. “They won’t choose me. The gods would reject the sacrifice. I’m so blood-starved, my heart’s all dried up.” “This is not about taste,” the wind mocked my naivety. “This is about reminding the herd of its place.” “I pray you’re right.” Eztli forced herself to smile, but I could tell my words didn’t ease her worries. “I hope the gods won’t pick Chimalli either.” “Chimalli?” I smirked at her. “Did he ask for your hand?” “He did.” Eztli brushed her hair with her hand. She often did that when she was pleased. “Father believes he’s not good enough for me, but Mother is leaning toward accepting the proposal.” I wasn’t particularly close to Chimalli—we barely spoke outside school—but he seemed like a friendly fellow from afar. It would be so strange to see Eztli married. I simply struggled to picture it. “I hope he will take good care of you.” Eztli chewed her lip. I caught a whiff of guilt in her gaze. “I will have to move out after the marriage.” My heart sank. The realization that I would be left alone with her parents hit me like a stone. Guatemoc and I got along when his wife wasn’t looking, but Necahual? Not so much. “Ah.” I didn’t know how else to reply. “Maybe you’ll move out before me,” Eztli said, trying to cheer me up. “I won’t.” The matchmaker had tried to set up three marriages for me and was rejected each time. Nobody wanted a white-haired boy born on the first day of the Wind month. I would bring misfortune to my wife’s family. “I still need to study three more years before I can become a trader.” Long-distance trading was a dangerous but lucrative occupation. The Nightlords forbade war within their dominion, but beasts and crafty bandits still roamed the lands of Yohuachanca. As the teachers said, a good trader knew when to run, when to fight, and when to haggle for his life. Those who survived enjoyed great prestige and accumulated wealth. Since I was physically too frail to earn stripes as a warrior and too cursed for the priesthood, trading was my best shot at leaving the village besides becoming an artisan. I could make an income, explore the empire, and meet people who hopefully wouldn’t believe in stupid superstitions. An awkward silence hung between the two us until she forced herself to smile. “Then I will visit you every day.” “You do not have to,” I protested. I loved her kindness, but I still had my pride. “No need for pity visits.” “I won’t leave you a choice.” Eztli put her hand in my hair and stroked my head. “You will always be my precious little Iztac. That will never change.” “We’re the same age and I’m taller than you,” I grumbled. “Don’t treat me like a child.” “Oh, are you pouting?” she teased me with a grin. “You’re cute when you do that, you know? I can’t resist.” “You’re insufferable.” And yet, I would miss her dearly. “But… once you’re married, you can always count on me if you need anything.” “Thanks, Iztac. You can count on me as well.” Eztli put her hand on her chest. “Swear?” “Swear,” I said while returning the gesture. I wasn’t sure why she would ever need the help of a cursed boy… but I would still offer it, no questions asked. We prepared to exit the river and dry ourselves when I felt something brushing against my submerged leg. My hand moved swiftly. My fingers closed on scales, and I lifted the fish out of the water. It was small with bright green scales, barely large enough to fit in my palm. Yet it felt so warm, struggling to escape my grasp. Fish were rare in the area, so it was quite the catch for me. The hunger growled in my stomach, almost like a primal compulsion. “Iztac?” Eztli asked with a frown. “Iztac, are you all right?” I barely made sense out of her words. My mind was no longer my own. I opened my mouth without thinking. It didn’t matter that the flesh was uncooked and raw. My teeth sank into the scales and bit into the flesh, crushing bone with ease. It might have been better cooked, but meat was meat. “Want some?” I asked Eztli after taking a mouthful. “Ew.” Eztli stuck her tongue at me. “You’re so gross, Iztac!” “You’re such a picky eater,” I teased her. “It literally swam to me. I say this is a gift from⁠—” A stone hit me in the back of the head with enough strength to make me stumble. I dropped the rest of the fish back into the river, the current carrying it away. “What did I tell you?!” Necahual shouted from the riverbank with another stone in her hand. Her lanky frame cast a long shadow on the water. She looked so very much like her daughter, but where Eztli radiated love and warmth, her mother was colder than a corpse. Her black eyes glared at me as if I had just murdered someone. “Never eat meat, you cursed boy!” “Iztac!” Eztli immediately swam to me and examined my head. It hurt. It hurt so much. By the Gods-in-Spirit, I felt blood dripping on my skull! Eztli immediately shouted, “You wounded him!” “I should have hit him harder,” her mother replied coldly. The boys and girls along the river watched the scene from afar. The pity in their gaze hurt almost as much as the stone. “He won’t listen. He won’t ever listen.” “Because it is a stupid superstition!” I snarled with a hand on my head. My warm blood slipped between my fingers. “Stupid beyond words!” A soothsayer had consulted the stars on the day of my birth, like all newborns. As I was born on the first day of the Wind month with white-hair and pale eyes, her prophecy had been particularly grim. “This boy is born possessed. He is a curse and a blessing both, for though he shall live a life of misfortune, he will keep a great evil from the world. Do not slay him, for his death will unleash the trapped spirit. Never give him meat, lest he develop a taste for human flesh.” That old hag had died years ago during the drought, yet her stupid prophecy still stood. I still cursed her each night. Since a soothsayer’s word carried great weight, my countrymen followed her command scrupulously. Fish and turkey were forever denied to me, as were rabbits, birds, frogs, and salamanders. I was forbidden to dine even on bugs, and I couldn’t even dream of a great longneck or a three-horns. Of course, I defied that stupid superstition. Guatemoc gave me a rabbit once when his wife was off picking herbs, and I often hunted salamanders near the river. I ate them in secret without developing a taste for human flesh. “Their life is a feeble dream,” the wind said. “Once you awaken your true self, you shall carry them weeping into the silent dark.” “Shut up,” I whispered back at the voices. Necahual held my gaze. She had heard me. “Your father should have drowned you in this river when you were born.” The words hurt like a slap, and I glared back at her with silent resentment. “Stop it, Mother,” Eztli pleaded with her mother. Other villagers watched the scene from afar in disapproval but did nothing. Nobody ever did anything. “That’s enough.” “Pale hair, empty soul,” Necahual said angrily. “That’s what the soothsayer said the day of his birth. An empty soul is a bane upon a house. We should never have taken him in. Even his mother didn’t want him.” A man shouldn’t raise his hand at a woman—especially before her own daughter—but at this moment I struggled against the urge to grab a stone and throw it back at Necahual. “What is this ruckus?” a voice called out from within the house. Necahual recoiled as her husband Guatemoc emerged from their home, his tall shadow looming in the sunlight, his cotton clothes exuding an aroma of fermented chicha. “What’s going on here?” “I caught him eating a fish,” Necahual complained. “This again?” Guatemoc rolled his eyes in annoyance. As a former warrior, he was strong, well-built, even handsome. His hair and eyes were black, while his skin was the color of copper. A war injury forced him to use a wood rod to stand due to a limp left knee, but he remained fearsome. “Cut him some slack. He’s our only worker, remember?” My father, Itzili, had died from the drought four years ago, and since the government paid a hefty sum to a family willing to take in orphans, Guatemoc chose to welcome me. The fact that I could work the farm in his stead helped a great deal. Necahual always held it against me, believing I had cursed their household despite working to keep it afloat, but her husband had the final word. “Now dry yourself up and put on some clothes,” Guatemoc ordered us. “I’m hungry.” Necahual crossed her arms in anger but said nothing. We had breakfast outside the house in silence. Nobody spoke around our house’s hearth as we ate cooked beans and tortillas; Necahual, as usual, served me the smallest portion. Eztli took care to apply healing powder to my wound, which soothed the pain. Her mother was a healer, and she had learned well while also being much kinder. “Now get to work, Iztac,” Guatemoc told me the moment we finished. “You don’t have school today, so you can work until sunset.” “Will you help?” I asked, while still sending Necahual a glare. “I will supervise.” Guatemoc turned to his wife. “Fetch me another cup.” “I can help him,” Eztli suggested kindly. “I don’t enjoy festivities too much.” “No,” her father replied with a scoff. “He needs to learn respect. You can go with your mother.” Eztli opened her mouth to argue, but I shook my head at her. I didn’t want her parents to be mad at us both. Guatemoc watched me work under the morning sun, sitting on a rock as Necahual brought him a jug of chicha. Pain filled my muscles as I maintained the muddy canals feeding our crops and tended to our maguey cacti. Eventually, Necahual and Eztli left for the celebrations at noon—the latter more reluctantly than the former. Guatemoc waited for his wife to disappear before letting out a sigh. “You can rest, Iztac. She’s gone.” He waved at me to join him. “Come here and have a drink. We have the whole afternoon ahead of us.” I put the tools away and welcomed the offer. “You don’t want to go to the festivities either?” “I’ve had my fill of blood.” Guatemoc poured me a cup and filled his own. “That way, everyone gets what they want.” As I guessed, he had lied his way out of an argument yet again. Guatemoc had spent his life fighting and grown tired of it. “Forgive my language,” I said, the cup warm in my hands, “but your wife is mad.” “She’s a healer. It’s her job to take curses seriously.” Guatemoc scoffed. “And you look too much like your father too, minus the hair and eyes. It unsettles her.” “What happened between them?” “Aren’t you tired of asking?” Guatemoc shrugged. “You’ll have to ask her.” I did once, and she threw a cup at me. I guessed I didn’t need to know her reasons. It wouldn’t make me hate her any less. “Love and hate, night and day, one and the same,” the wind whispered. “There is an obsidian darkness buried deep in her heart, waiting for you to dig it up. How beautiful she would be then.” “Shut up,” I answered under my breath. “I’m tired.” Guatemoc observed me carefully, a hint of sympathy in his gaze. “You’re hearing voices again?” “It’s just the wind,” I half-lied. I had heard voices in the breeze since before I learned to speak, and when I foolishly told teachers about them, this only confirmed the soothsayer’s prophecy to the people. I didn’t feel comfortable discussing them with anybody, even Eztli. “I knew someone who heard voices in his head too. A warrior who had seen too much.” Guatemoc poured chicha down his throat. “One day he grabbed an axe and murdered his own son because his voices told him to.” “One night we shall dance in the Land of the Dead Suns,” the wind said, “where skulls plot their revenge and the true gods feast.” “Hence why I try not to listen to mine,” I replied half-jokingly. “Then drink.” Guatemoc’s scowl deepened. “It helps drown out dark thoughts.” I scoffed and sipped the chicha. I hated the sour taste, but if it had helped Guatemoc deal with his nightmares, perhaps it could help with mine. “Do you think we can drink our way out of this?” “Don’t get your hopes up. The priests will let us skip the festivities, but attending the coronation is mandatory.” Guatemoc snorted in disdain. “Their so-called gods won’t let us spurn them.” The chicha had loosened his tongue. “‘So-called?’” Guatemoc paled and briefly looked over his shoulder. Once he was certain we were alone, he relaxed enough to speak his mind. “I saw one of their spawns die during an Amazonian raid,” he said. “The forest ladies took him by surprise and dragged him into the sun. He turned to dust in a minute.” He had told me this story many times before. Every time he drank too much, in fact. “The priests said a Nightkin is not a Nightlord, but I’ve wondered ever since…” Guatemoc played with his empty cup, his eyes wandering to the sky. “If the child can die so easily, is the parent truly divine?” I had no answer to this question… though I shared his doubts. My late father hadn't believed in the gods either, and the false superstitions I suffered from only made me more skeptical of authority figures. “I’ve talked with a long-distance trader at the market once,” I said. That was only half-true. Eztli did most of the talking, since she could charm her way out of anything. “He told me the Sapa people to the south worship other gods that do not demand blood.” “Perhaps you should move there after completing your studies,” Guatemoc mused. “What happened to that trader?” I scowled. “The priests took him away one day, and I never saw him again.” “I figured. Traders with loose tongues don’t last long.” Guatemoc shrugged. “Remember that when you finally earn your license.” I scoffed and raised my cup. “To three more years.” “To three more years,” Guatemoc replied with a tired look. “Three years…” We spent the whole afternoon watching the clouds. Or at least I did, while Guatemoc ended up drinking himself to sleep. I laid him on the grass and then climbed onto the house’s roof to get a better look at the sky. Today was the winter solstice and the shortest day of the year. I wondered if I would catch a glimpse of the stars before the coronation. Astronomers say the world is a sphere so large it boggles the mind. I thought as the sun began to set beyond the horizon. The moon was rising red—full and terrifying. I wonder if the people on the other side of the world see the same constellations. Do they fear the night too? There were whispers of distant lands far beyond the Boiling Sea, full of barbarians with gold for hair and marble for skin. Once I accumulated enough money, I would buy a boat and try my luck at crossing the sea. The Nightlords’ reach didn’t expand beyond the ocean. Or perhaps I should take Guatemoc’s suggestion and flee south to the lands of the Sapa. I doubted they would welcome a fugitive from Yohuachanca, but I could always try my luck anyway. “It is time,” a cold voice called out to me, and not a ghostly one. “Iztac Ce Ehecatl.” My head snapped to my left in surprise, and I found myself facing two red eyes peering at me from the garden. Two men had intruded on the farm. One was busy waking up Guatemoc, and the other looked up at me from the ground below. How they had sneaked up on us without a sound, I couldn’t tell. Like all priests of the Nightlords, these two wore armored vests of layered cotton and bones thick enough to stop arrows, round bamboo shields, and hardwood helmets. Each of them carried an obsidian club—a wooden sword whose sides were embedded with rows of sharp, prismatic volcanic glass blades. These edges were said to be so sharp that they could behead a man with a single blow. Priests of the Nightlords were bound to their masters through a blood pact, and it showed. Their eyes were red-rimmed and their pupils a pale shade of crimson. Each wore a cloak made of human skin leather; once a Nightlord and their spawns had fed on a tribute, their corpses were harvested by the priesthood so that their sacrifice might never be forgotten. “The gods will soon rise for the Emperor’s sake,” the red-eyed man said. I could smell the nauseating stench of rotting human flesh radiating off him. “To the Blood Pyramid with you.” “Death awaits,” the wind whispered. My farming village existed in the shadow of Yohuachanca’s capital, Mazatilia. Its bloodsoaked brick walls were taller than hills. Jeweled mosaics of eagles, snakes, tyrant lizards, and fish covered their surface. A fleet of ships ranging from fishing canoes to colossal galleys sailed from its port each day to deliver goods through the great Matzayani lake and the rivers that fed it. Each of its stone gates was large enough to let five llama-driven wagons through simultaneously. Its sprawling streets dizzied the mind in their vastness. Our group of stragglers, which had grown to two dozen souls, stepped through plazas ten times larger than my entire village under the shadow of red limestone pyramids. Jade and marble statues of animals watched over the citizens like emissaries of the gods. The city housed markets that fed a million souls and ballcourt stadiums that sparked riots like wood-fueled fire. Yet the city held its breath under the red moon’s light. I had visited the capital to help Necahual sell food and potions often enough to know the markets’ smell: the sweet aroma of fruits, leather, and herbs; the scent of rare goods like warm chocolate; the thick bitterness of animals sold dead or alive. I sensed none of them tonight. The stench of human blood drowned out all other smells. Guards patrolled the streets on trihorns with spears in hands and grim looks on their faces. Their mounts, four-legged creatures that were longer than three men and capable of carrying two, fidgeted in fear. Their green scales could stop arrows, and their horns could gore a jaguar, yet they feared the coming dark all the same. “This way,” the priests told our group as they guided us to the city’s central square—a place so large that the entire population could gather there under the Blood Pyramid’s shadow. And they did. A shapeless mass of a million people were present, thickly packed together and yet obediently quiet. “To the base of the pyramid.” Guatemoc was as silent as I was, but paler than me. The fact that the priests came to bring us so close to the Nightlords meant we were both on the succession list. I shuddered, hoping they would pick neither of us. The mere sight of the Blood Pyramid up close made me pause in awe and dread. The structure was a mountain of crimson stones. How far did its apex reach? One hundred and a half feet? Two hundred? I counted at least ten layers of stone piled up on one another. Obsidian statues of giant alligators with braziers burning in their maws watched over its massive foundations. A colossal stairway of narrow stone steps led to a ghastly altar at the summit. Its intricate design represented a terrifying face with burning eyes, two great horns, and a mouth full of sharp fangs; its bones were carved from black obsidian, and its eyes and teeth from glittering rubies. This was the fearsome face of the First Emperor, father of the Nightlords and founder of Yohuachanca, who had ascended to become the Final Sun. Yet it was the pyramid’s moat that frightened me the most. A ditch filled with skulls surrounded the structure—human skulls. I dared not count them. The very stones of the pyramid were soaked with the blood of the tributes. I couldn’t see either Eztli or Necahual among the crowd. The priests and guards pushed my group to a spot close to the ditch, where a thousand other men waited, all aged from sixteen to forty. I recognized people from other villages around the capital. Our administrative area must have been put on the bracket. Old and young men, warriors and scholars, the strong and the weak—none dared speak. I held onto my cotton shirt, for the night was dark and cruel. The scarlet moon shone like a second sun, her dark radiance obscuring even the stars. Three calls of a droning horn announced the emperor’s arrival. Red-eyed priests forced the crowd to split in two, leaving an open path to the pyramid’s stairs. “All kneel before the Great Emperor of Yohuachanca, the Godspeaker, Servant of the Long Night and the last king of the Twelfth Cycle, the Huey Tlatoani, and Conqueror of the Earth!” Guards hit shields of wood with their spears, the rumbling noise ever stronger. “Nochtli the Fourteenth, and his four consorts!” The people of Yohuachanca knelt as one, myself included. The imperial cortege entered the plaza to the tune of booming horns and thundering war drums. I dared raise my head to peek. A thousand soldiers marched in an orderly procession. Mighty warriors clad in jaguar skins or draped in eagle feathers walked side by side with trihorn riders and other warbeasts. Standard bearers raised the eclipse sun flag of Yohuachanca on its field of red. It was indeed a mighty army, the empire’s martial pride, and the elite survivors of a hundred battles. An escort fit for an emperor. An enormous, scaled quadruped strolled into the plaza. The ground shook with each step of its tree-thick legs. Its tail swung like a whip powerful enough to shatter stone, and its neck was as long as its body. A golden palanquin sat atop the creature’s back, carrying the emperor and his four consorts. It was my first time seeing these people in the flesh. Nochtli the Fourteenth had spent his year-long reign either warring or whoring, subjugating chieftains and adding their daughters to his harem. I expected a titan of a warrior, a giant wielding a sword of obsidian. Instead, I saw a big-bellied man so fat that I wondered how a woman could survive his embrace. His gorgeous cotton clothes couldn’t hide his overflowing pallid belly nor his thick black veins. His head had been shaved. Dark circles surrounded his hollow gaze; he waved his hand at the crowd in a daze, going through the motions. Most emperors were drugged on the way to the altar. I thought this one would be different. His four consorts were as slim as he was thick, fair ladies chosen from all across the empire to serve as the emperor’s confidants. They too were shaved and addled, their nakedness exposed to the world. They reminded me of dead turkeys sent straight to the butcher’s shop. “That is what they are,” the wind whispered. “The feast’s sweet dessert.” The longneck beast sat at the pyramid’s base. Red-eyed priests helped the emperor and his retinue climb down from their ride and ascend the pyramid’s stairs. They dragged these five dazzled rulers upward, slowly and methodically. So heavy was our emperor that he needed four men to carry him. The red moonlight lit their way. Guatemoc held his breath, as did everyone else. A chilling cold fell upon the plaza. The stars had gone out in the sky, leaving only the scarlet moon to paint the heavens red. I glimpsed shadows flying in the dark high above us. All of Yohuachanca observed in silence as the emperor completed his ascent. Priests stripped him of his clothes and laid him on the altar. With his strength and size, the emperor could have cast down one of them into the void below, but he did not. The man did not even resist, nor did his consorts. These four were bound to the altar by ropes to make sure they wouldn’t thrash around. Once they had the emperor lying on the altar, the priests nailed his hands and feet to the horns. The emperor did not make a sound as his blood dripped down onto the pyramid. Not even a hint of it. The goddesses, however, screeched their pleasure to the heavens. I froze in dread as they descended from the darkened skies. They arrived in a swarm of hundreds, their dark crimson fur reflected in the red moonlight, their bat snouts aroused by the smell of blood. Their sharpened talons could carry a trihorn away and rip a man’s head from his shoulders. Translucent wings let them glide and land gracefully onto the pyramid’s steps. None dared approach the summit. For they were Nightkin, scions of the gods and no true lords of the dark. Their masters materialized atop the pyramid in a cloud of mist. The four Nightlords appeared around the altar, each of them clad in ceremonial red robes of rich silk laced with gold and feathers. Dark hoods and wooden masks hid their faces from mortals unworthy of beholding their beauty. But no darkness could hide the crimson glow of their hungry gaze. They appeared almost human from afar, though they were anything but. I immediately recognized each of them by their mask: Ocelocihuatl, the Jaguar Woman; Yoloxochitl, the Flower of the Heart; Iztacoatl, the White Snake; Sugey, the Bird of War. The ladies of the north, the west, the east, and the south; the daughters of the First Emperor and queens of the night. The feast began with the consorts. I was too far below to see clearly, but I witnessed enough to make my stomach turn. Each Nightlord grabbed an imperial consort and swiftly fed upon their prey. The gods’ table manners differed greatly between them. Yoloxochitl elegantly bit her tribute’s neck and painlessly drained her dry. Sugey, who hated wasting time, squeezed a consort’s skull like a fruit until her eyes popped out, ripped off her head from the shoulders, and then let the sweet blood drip down her gullet. Cruel Ocelocihuatl ripped her victim apart limb from limb, tossing the scraps to the nightkin below; the bat-faced beasts squealed and fought over a piece of leg like dogs over a bone. Iztacoatl played with her food, biting the breasts and the wrists, savoring the blood with refined savagery. Though I observed the scene far below, the scarlet moon reflected the scene like a mirror in all its lurid details. I looked away with a bitter taste in my mouth. Many among my group did the same. The others watched on either in naked fear—mostly Guatemoc—or zealous adoration. I didn’t understand these people. I never found anything inspiring in ritual sacrifices. “Because these goddesses are false,” the voices answered. “Parasites forsaken from dawn to sunset, shadows on a wall.” I forced myself to look back. I didn’t want to remember this scene—I’d witnessed this ceremony too many times—but I had to. I didn’t want to forget cruelty’s face. The Nightlords wanted us afraid the same way Necahual threatened me. I might not have the power to change things, but I wouldn’t flinch from them. Once they had finished consuming the consorts down to the last drop of blood, the Nightlords turned their attention to the emperor. The queens of the night all laid a hand on the man’s chest. Then they ripped him open in a flash of speed. The Nightlords’ claws grabbed the emperor’s ribs and pulled them back, severing skin and flesh. The pain must have been horrendous, for it woke the sacrifice from his drugged daze. The emperor screamed in pain as a fountain of blood surged from his body. The Nightlords showed him no mercy; in fact, his agony only drove them into a maddened frenzy. Their hands ripped him open piece by piece, their mouths feasting on his delicious blood. It wasn’t long until they found their prize—the emperor’s still-beating heart. The Jaguar Woman ripped it out of his chest in the blink of an eye. Her crimson robes hid the blood well. The emperor breathed his last without a final scream, and the Nightlords paraded their trophy over his corpse. Then, at the climax of this gruesome feast, they impaled the heart on one of the altar’s horns. Its ruby eyes shone with an eldritch gleam. The stones themselves appeared to feed on the precious, precious blood. Satisfied, the Nightlords then approached the summit’s edge to better face the people. The Nightkin obediently bowed before their mistresses, as did the people of Yohuachanca. Lady Sugey, the Bird of War and Mistress of Battle, spoke for her siblings. Her deep, powerful voice echoed across the city with a thundering boom. “Our covenant is renewed,” she declared with pride. “We Nightlords accept your tribute on behalf of the First Emperor. A ruler’s blood shall purchase a prosperous dawn for Yohuachanca. Fear not the silent dusk, for we shall guide and protect thee through the long nights.” She raised a fist toward the scarlet moon. “Long live Yohuachanca!” The crowd exploded into cheers and applause. With the gods satisfied, the tension in the air evaporated. Women cried up tears of relief, men jumped in place, children laughed. I stood as an island of sullen silence in a sea of noise and joy. An emperor’s death brought a prosperous year... “I’ll miss this one,” I heard someone say behind me. “He won us many battles.” “I hope the next emperor will bring us luck,” another man answered, almost cheerfully. “I wonder who it will be.” Am I mad? Was I the only one to whom this ceremony felt wrong? Perhaps I’d spent too much time listening to voices decrying the gods as false. “Not all gods are false,” the wind replied, “but true deities have nothing to prove.” For once, the voices in my head sounded halfway wise. Neither did Guatemoc find much joy in the emperor’s death. The throne never stayed empty for long. The Jaguar Woman clapped her hands, and the million-strong crowd fell silent. “The Twelfth Cycle ends tonight with the tribute of its fifty-second emperor.” Ocelocihuatl’s voice was less rough than her sister’s but sharper. Each word sent shivers down my spine. “The stars foretell that the Thirteenth Cycle shall be an age of glory. We shall now crown a new emperor to usher it in. He shall guide our herd, protect you from your enemies, and forgive your sins. Then, one year from now, he shall ascend these steps to renew the covenant.” Most members of my group held their breath, but not out of fear—far from it. Being chosen as the emperor was the highest of honors. Short his reign might be, it would be spent in glory and luxury. Their names would forever endure beyond their deaths in history books. Guatemoc didn’t share their opinion. He shivered so much I thought he might collapse dead at my feet. Eztli’s father loved wealth, but he would rather die in his bed in ten years’ time than on an altar in one. And I felt the same. “The stars have spoken,” the Jaguar Woman said. “This year’s emperor shall be chosen from the Acampa Calpulli.” My heart skipped a beat. My head snapped in Guatemoc’s direction. His forehead sweated more than a fountain, and his hands joined in a foolish prayer. Who was he even begging to? No one would be listening tonight. “Born on the first day of the month,” the Jaguar Woman carried on. “Under the auspices of the Wind⁠—” I ran. I didn’t think, I didn’t breathe, I didn’t stop. I just ran as fast as my legs could carry me. I pushed Guatemoc aside with such strength that he collapsed head-first into the brick ground. I immediately regretted it, but I did not come back to pick him back up. I was too frightened. My panicked reaction took the red-eyed priests by surprise, and I managed to get past them. The crowd before me dispersed with a scream of surprise. I didn’t wonder why for long. A winged shadow descended upon me and grabbed me by the shoulders. My feet dangled above the ground as talons carried me upward, and the plaza started to become smaller and smaller. I was flying for the first time in my life. And it sucked. I shivered in dread, with the wind blowing into my face and the bloody ground calling out to me. “Let me go!” I struggled against my captor’s grip. The fact that freedom meant a fatal fall and a gruesome crash didn’t cross my mind immediately. “Let me go!” The Nightkin holding me only tightened his talons’ grip. He flew toward the pyramid’s summit and gently dropped me in front of the altar. His claws released me into the hands of greater danger. “Here you are, Iztac Ce Ehecatl.” A cold more intense than anything I had ever felt seized me. My muscles moved on their own, my neck lifting my head until I faced four pairs of eyes looking down on me. My knees remained anchored to the ground, deep in the viscous puddle of blood. Whether it belonged to the consorts or the emperor, I couldn’t tell. The stench was nauseating. “My poor child, so full of fear.” Yoloxochitl leaned in to better look at me. Her voice was soothing, almost motherly, but her flowery mask failed to hide her sharp fangs. “Why do you seem so unsettled? You have been chosen for the greatest honor.” You’re mistaken. I wanted to say it out loud, but my mouth refused to open. The Nightlords’ red eyes commanded my bones and muscles; her magic overwhelmed my mind. Like a puppet, Sugey gently took my hand into her own and lifted me up. My body turned to face a crowd of a million. People looked so small from here… I could hardly tell one face from the other. “The old emperor is dead,” Sugey addressed the crowd before presenting me to the people with a wave of her hand. “All hail the new emperor, long may he reign!” A thunderstorm of claps and applause welcomed my coronation. The Nightkin echoed the mortals’ joy with screeches of impatience. The people of Yohuachanca laughed, smiled, and cheered for my coronation. For my future death. I had waited so long to escape this place. I had been biting my tongue and suffered every indignity in silence. I had waited and worked and toiled, all for nothing. My wishes had gone unanswered, and now I had been marked for death. “Do you yield?” the wind asked me. “Or do you die?” “I hope you shall taste better than your predecessor,” Sugey whispered to me with the tone Eztli used when she complained about overcooked tortilla. A surge of anger rose within my heart. A fire born of wrath and injustice. Whether it gave me the strength to overcome the shackles on my mind or whether the Nightlords had released their control long enough to let me speak, I managed to say two words. Two small words that would define my entire tenure. “I refuse,” I said. part0006. 1EMPEROR FOR LIFE The Nightlords crowned me atop the Blood Pyramid. Priests dressed me in lavish garments, including a beautiful mantle of turquoise, which only an emperor was fit to wear. I had never felt something so soft against my skin. Jade, gold, and shells were interwoven with the fibers; I wore a treasury precious enough to buy a city. A cloak of feathers kept me warm in the cold night, while comfortable sandals protected my feet. My clothes soothed me the way a burial shroud enveloped the dead. Then the Nightlords bestowed the emperor’s crown upon my head: a splendid golden headdress of precious stones and multicolored feathers harvested from legendary winged serpents. Leather straps kept them tightly attached to my head, like chains. The entire empire seemed to hold its breath as it watched me from the plaza below. Once I had been properly crowned, Sugey, the Bird of War, swiftly tore my dead predecessor’s head off his shoulders. Ocelocihuatl, the Jaguar Woman, laid a hand on the bloody trophy. The previous emperor rotted away within seconds, his eyes falling out of their sockets, his skin and flesh turning into wisps of smoke. Only an immaculate skull remained. “Now, Iztac Ce Ehecatl.” The Jaguar Woman gently put my predecessor’s skull into my hands. “Bring him to his resting place, so his spirit might watch over you, as you shall protect your successor.” The skull was heavy in my hands. I’d never held one in my life. I suddenly realized how many muscles our necks required to carry these thick heads of ours. Still, I expected the full weight of a life to be greater than this. Nochtli the Fourteenth had died in the prime of his life, and here he was, staring back at me. I gazed into the empty sockets and the blackness within. At a vision of my future. “Emperor Iztac.” I looked up at the Jaguar Woman, whose eyes shone bright red in the scarlet night. Though her mask and hood kept most of her face hidden from me, I immediately recognized that gaze. Necahual had sent it to me so many times. Pure contempt. My heart hastened with years of buried anger as I remembered all the insults, all the looks, all the sneers I had ever endured. My fingers trembled with rage. I glared at this so-called goddess, who considered me a worm to squash underfoot rather than a human being. My lips moved on their own, in all violation of reason and sanity, and answered her with a single word. “No.” A tense, heavy silence fell upon the top of the Blood Pyramid. The other Nightlords, who had treated the coronation with little more than boredom, gazed at me in sudden surprise. Their Nightkin and priests fell silent. My own blood froze within my veins. I had roused a deadly beast from its slumber, and I knew it would cost me dearly. The Jaguar Woman’s lips pursed in anger. “No?” I knew a twitch of her hand could end me forever. But to die now or in a year—what difference did it make? I refused to be looked down upon by anyone, even a goddess. With nothing left to lose, I had found the courage of desperation. “You’ve killed this man.” I shoved the skull back into Ocelocihuatl’s hands. The Jaguar Woman did not stop me; she was simply too angry to respond properly to my act of rebellion. “The proper thing would be to bury him yourself!” I didn’t know how many people heard my words. The Nightlords used magic to increase the strength of their voices so that all could listen to their sermons. It would make sense for them to silence me. “Fear not,” the wind whispered into my ear. “We shall carry thy words to those who will listen.” It did little to dull the pain. I felt icy fingers close around my throat with the strength of ten men. One second, my lungs were full of air, and the next, they were empty. My flesh was crushed by magic so swiftly that I didn’t even have time to gargle. I was no stranger to pain. I had been slapped by Necahual, I had had stones thrown at me, I had received beatings during weapon training at school. But all of these paled before the agony of being strangled. I was brought to my knees, my hands tugging at my throat, desperately looking for a noose that wasn’t there. “I will have none of your backtalk.” The Jaguar Woman did not move an inch as I collapsed before her. Her hands of flesh still held my predecessor’s skull in their palm, but phantom fingers strangled me nonetheless. Her red eyes stared at me with lethal coldness. “Insolent slave.” Gone were the lies of honor and glory. The Jaguar Woman spoke her mind. Iztacoatl, the White Snake, put a hand on her mouth to stifle her laughter. Sugey appeared vaguely amused, while Yoloxochitl observed my agony with a compassionate sigh. “Forgive him, sister, for he is young,” she told the Jaguar Woman. “He does not yet comprehend his duties.” “Oh, I believe he does understand,” Iztacoatl said, her melodious voice half-breaking into laughter. “More than the fools below.” “He’s braver than his predecessor,” Sugey commented with some appreciation. “I like it. This foolish dog will make for a fine warhound once properly tamed.” I would have called her something worse than a dog if I could still string two sentences together. My lungs were on fire. My throat failed to gasp for air, and blood rushed to my head. My vision blurred at the edges. “There is nothing to forgive, sisters. Our father’s altar will accept no other sustenance.” The Jaguar Woman knelt at my side, a hand on my cheek, as she watched me slowly lose consciousness. “Let this be a sharp lesson unto you, mortal. Defy us again at your peril.” I lost consciousness under the red moonlight—my body defeated, but my pride unbroken. It was the peeking sunlight that woke me up. I groaned as my eyes struggled against the luminosity. A sweet smell entered my nose, my lungs gasping for air. My naked back rested on the softest mattress I’d ever touched, and a cotton bed sheet covered the rest of my body. Something blew a gentle breeze into my face to keep it cool. My eyelids felt heavier than stones, but eventually I regained enough strength to open them. I found myself staring at a splendid window wider than Guatemoc’s house and cut into a wall of marble decorated with golden eagles and emerald snakes. It was made of the clearest obsidian glass I had ever seen—enough to let the sunlight filter in and give a clear view of the capital outside, albeit darkened. The Blood Pyramid stood at its center like a red dagger pointed at dawn. The sight caused my hand to tug at my throat. It still felt a bit sore where the Jaguar Woman’s magic touched me. I glanced around and held my breath in shock. I had woken up in an opulent… room? The place appeared to stretch farther than a farm field. My own bed, whose mattress was stuffed with gentle feathers rather than cotton, covered as much ground as Guatemoc’s house. The floor was made of polished stucco covered in finely woven mats and animal furs—mostly jaguars’ and rabbits’. Magnificent tapestries made of bright cotton and feathers adorned the walls, each of them portraying epic scenes such as the rise of the Final Sun, glorious imperial victories, and the shaping of the world. The amenities were nothing short of dazzling. Incense burners filled the area with a sweet, flowery smell. A wardrobe awaited someone to try its hundred feathered mantles. A finely chiseled black wood table sat near the bed, covered by pottery, an elaborate drinking set, and warm chocolate cups. Each of them cost as much as a year’s harvest. Finally, I realized I wasn’t alone in the room. Two nubile, topless young women—they couldn’t have been older than me—fanned me with leaves taken from a giant tree. They were pretty, maybe even more than Eztli. Their breasts were full and firm, their lustrous skin scarless, and their hands untainted by hard manual labor. Their long black hair was held together by feathered headbands. I couldn’t see their eyes, though; they conspicuously avoided my gaze. I could have mistaken this place for heaven… if not for the skull sitting atop the cushion next to my head. “Where… Where am I?” I whispered, struggling to put my thoughts in order. My predecessor, who had watched over my sleep, did not answer me. Neither did the girls. “You, where am I?” Only when I addressed them directly did one of the women answer. “In your royal bedchambers, oh Great Emperor.” “Your desires are ours,” the other answered. She still failed to meet my gaze, though I caught a glimpse of black eyes. “If you wish for anything, you only need to ask.” So I wasn’t dead yet. I raised my back and immediately winced upon feeling a sense of irritation on my chest. A small tattoo was marked right where the heart should be: a red cross trapped inside a circle. Four exquisitely detailed pictures were drawn within each quarter of the design: a black jaguar’s head; a white, feathered snake; a white flower; a blue hummingbird. The Nightlords’ personal symbols. The Gods-in-the-Flesh had marked me as their property. Their slave. I growled in anger and tried to scratch the mark away with my nails, to no avail. Curses. I heard a sound, and my head snapped in its direction in alarm. Two great doors of wood on the other side of the bedroom opened and a man with a black feathered headdress walked in. He was tall, taller than Guatemoc, and strong like a trihorn. Though plump and with a double-chin, his arms’ muscles seemed chiseled straight from a quarry’s thickest stones. He went by with a regal red mantle that reached all the way to the knees, though his eyes were a darker shade of crimson. His skin was unnaturally smooth and hairless, his steps steady and nearly soundless. His face was pleasant, but his eyes did not smile when his lips did. Two guards wearing jaguar furs followed him with obsidian clubs in hand. Most importantly, though they lowered their eyes rather than meet my gaze, the red-eyed man did not. I was immediately on my guard. “Oh, my emperor.” The priest bowed before me. His voice was quite high-pitched for a man. “It is an honor for this humble Tlacaelel to welcome you into your divine palace.” It wasn’t one for me. I glanced at the obsidian window, basking in the darkened sun’s comfortable radiance. So long as it remained in the sky, no Nightlord would touch me. I hoped. “The dawn has risen,” I said warily, trying to gather my thoughts. I felt as safe as a turkey sensing a predator near the pen. “Yes, it has been many hours since your coronation,” the red-eyed priest said. “The honor proved too much, and you fainted halfway through.” I glared at him. Did he truly believe what he said, or was he just trying to make me swallow a polite lie? I refused to play along. “Yes, honor is like a noose,” I said with a dry tone. “There is no greater joy than being strangled by a goddess. It’s truly breathtaking.” His smile didn’t fade. “I’m sure you will remember in time, Your Majesty.” He knew the truth and still expected me to play along with the lie. I already hated him. No, Iztac, calm down. I remembered the school’s warrior training. Teachers taught us to first observe the enemy before engaging him, and that foolishness was not bravery. I should be cautious. Play along and wait for an opportunity. See if there’s a way out. The Nightlords had shown me their true faces last night. They were like Necahual, but crueler. I wouldn’t let my guard down. “Who are you?” I asked the priest. “Why are you here? Did the Nightlords send you to keep an eye on me?” “I wouldn’t go that far, Your Majesty,” Tlacaelel replied, which was a polite way of saying yes. “I have served all emperors from the Twelfth Cycle as advisor and intendant of the imperial household.” I scoffed. “You’re my leash.” “I am your advisor and your loyal servant.” Tlacaelel’s expression never changed, no matter what he said. He reminded me of our religious teacher, who always smiled whenever he described the best way to flay a man alive. “But perhaps we can discuss our respective duties over breakfast, Your Majesty?” “Why?” I glanced at the table with suspicion. “Are the drinks drugged?” “Do you want drugs in your xocolatl?” Tlacaelel asked me with a curious look. “Servants pour it without any, but we can spice the drink if you wish.” In hindsight, I realized my question was a foolish one. They wouldn’t need a pretense to drug me. “I’ll do without it, thanks.” I moved to the edge of my bed—a tiresome task considering its length—but Tlacaelel quickly snapped his fingers. To my surprise, two more topless women entered the room, grabbed a mantle from the wardrobe, and swiftly began to dress me up in fine clothes. I was so surprised that I didn’t even resist. The new servants set the table for me and Tlacaelel, including tablecloths of white fabric, while the older ones kept fanning me as I sat on a pillow. One of the women served me a sumptuous dish with a divine smell—an enormous fish with pristine green scales on a bed of squash, tomatoes, and half a dozen vegetables I didn’t recognize. The tiny creature I had caught in the river yesterday looked terribly small compared to this meaty creature. As for the warm chocolate drink, it was poured into a cup of gold with vanilla, chili, and spices I’d only ever smelled from afar at the city market. The set also included an earthenware tobacco pipe for smoking and freshly baked tortilla bread. Though I tried to keep a composed face, I couldn’t help but salivate. I had never seen so much meat in my life. Tlacaelel made no move, and I suddenly realized he was politely waiting for me to begin. After some hesitation, I plastered some fish meat and tomatoes on a tortilla, then bit it carefully. I dropped all caution the moment the flavors rushed through my tongue. It was simply… delicious. So soft, so rich in its texture, so juicy! This simple taste banished a thousand other meals from my memory, until only it alone remained. I took one bite and then another, unable to stop, unable to control myself. “I am glad you’re enjoying your first dish, Your Majesty,” Tlacaelel said as I gorged myself on the food. “I was informed that you suffered from starvation in your youth, so I asked the cooks to establish a meat-intensive regime. We shall have you strong as a feathered tyrant by the moon’s turn.” I was too busy making up for years of privation to answer him. My stomach, unused to so much food, both growled and hurt. Neither my hands nor my teeth would stop eating. When my mouth went dry, I sipped the chocolate. I receive a taste of heaven on the tip of my tongue, honeyed and sweet. They’d mixed things with the drink, spices I didn’t know existed. The flavors were new to me and impossible to describe, for I had nothing to compare them to. “This…” I had to put the cup aside for a moment to recover from the aftershock. “This is delicious.” “Your kitchens are stocked with ingredients from all over the empire and prepared by the best cooks,” Tlacaelel boasted, his voice almost a song. “You will never have cause to complain, I promise you.” I had to admit that the food was a wonderful way to sweeten my bitter mood. “Your voice sounds…” I frowned as I thought over my words. I had little experience with small talk, especially with priests. “Strange.” “Since my duties demand that I supervise the emperor’s consorts, my manhood was taken from me many, many moons ago.” Tlacaelel chuckled to himself. “No man may approach blessed women with a weapon, as some say.” A eunuch. I suddenly felt a little sorry for him. “And you don’t… miss it?” “No, I volunteered for the procedure,” he replied calmly. His sheer impassibility was almost frightening. “I always wanted to serve in my current capacity.” “I… I do not understand you.” Did he actually enjoy being mutilated? “Why is nobody else looking at me?” “Because you are a living god, Your Majesty. The Dawnbringer. Can mortals look at the sun without expecting to be burned?” I would always remember my first week at school. A bunch of boys my age approached me for my good grades, treating me like a friend and telling me I was so smart and that I should become part of their group. Eventually, they’d invited me to a secret celebration at night. I’d followed them like a fool. I never had friends, so I didn’t see the teeth behind the smiles. In the end, they ended up tossing me into a sanitary pit and tossed shit at me till I clawed my way out. I’d never forgotten the humiliation or trusted kind words since. Most people not named Eztli were only nice to me when they wanted something. Even Guatemoc only treated me kindly because I worked on his farm. If Tlacaelel hoped to soften me up, he had failed. Flatteries were to men what hooks were to a fish. I wouldn’t bite. “None but the Nightlords and their attendants are allowed to look upon your face without permission,” Tlacaelel said. “Those who dare will lose an eye.” “Even my family?” I suddenly wondered what happened to Eztli and her parents after the coronation. “Are they⁠—” “Forgive my bluntness, Your Majesty, but you should forget your mortal existence,” Tlacaelel said with a gentle scoff. “It was but a dream, and your true life begins now. The little people who took you in were blessed by your presence for a time, but they are beneath your notice now.” It sounded like he believed it too. I waited for the voices in my head to mock him, but they did not. The window keeps the wind out. I gazed at the pure blue sky. That’s odd. It always found its way inside the house. “Unless, of course, you wish for more servants,” Tlacaelel suggested, taking my silence as an invitation to continue. “I’m told the man is a hard worker and the women are quite lovely. Your harem does need some fresh blood, and your zookeeper requested more hands now that your jaguars mauled two members of his staff.” “My… My harem?” And what did he mean by a zookeeper? What was that? “As the First Emperor was attended by the Nightlords, four wives have been selected to advise you in these trying times. And, of course, follow you into your eternal rest once your tenure ends.” Tlacaelel almost managed to make murder sound pleasant. Almost. “Besides your esteemed consorts, the palace is home to many concubines eager to service you. Your predecessor never slept with the same woman twice, or so he liked to boast.” The rumors about my predecessor’s lust weren’t exaggerated then. I glanced at the topless women fanning me. Just how many of them ran around this palace? “So he kept, what, three hundred women?” I asked, the number boggling my mind. “Four hundred?” “The imperial harem reached three thousand concubines at its apex,” Tlacaelel replied casually, making me choke in surprise. “Though we had to sacrifice those past childbearing age, the sick, the useless, and the infirm before your coronation.” He said the last part with such terrifying nonchalance that it sent shivers down my spine. I dared not ask for details. “You may also request the first night of any bride,” Tlacaelel said. “If you wish for any woman to join your harem on a more permanent basis—even another’s wife or a virgin—you only need to ask.” “Just like that?” I asked, astonished. Tlacaelel gave me a warm, genial smile. “The citizens of Yohuachanca are your slaves, my emperor. You can dispose of them as you wish. If you want anything from them, it shall be yours.” “So if I say…” I locked eyes with this man, wondering if he would live by his own words. “Kill yourself, you will follow through?” “You may request the gods to grant your prayers.” Tlacaelel’s crimson eyes flickered like a flame. “You are the Nightlords’ speaker, but we red-eyed priests are their slaves. Our lives end at their leisure, but I am certain they will entertain your request.” I knew it. I only had as much power as the Nightlords lent me. They dangled pleasures before my eyes to make the noose more bearable. Tlacaelel carried on with his explanations. “Your predecessors exterminated entire tribes or houses that dared offend their honor. As Huey Tlaloni, you may also declare war on barbarians and enforce the heavens’ justice. Of course, our mistresses require sustenance, so we cannot cull the herd too much.” My eyes glanced at my predecessor’s skull. “You don’t say.” “As emperor, you are expected to lead our armies to victory, subjugate or pacify our neighbors, supervise religious rituals, and bestow the gods’ justice on mortal petitioners,” Tlacaelel explained. “Each of your consorts will counsel you in one of these matters, but I can introduce you to them after you put your predecessor to rest.” Of course. The Nightlords were too good for mortal chores. I gently grabbed my predecessor’s skull and looked into its empty eye sockets. It stared back at me, its teeth twisted into a hateful grin. “There is a reliquary on the roof only accessible to emperors,” Tlacaelel said. “Many of your predecessors used it for meditation. Once you lay Nochtli the Fourteenth to rest, perhaps he shall share his wisdom with you.” “What wisdom is there to share?” I asked. “He died a gruesome, lonely death.” “After living a glorious life, my emperor. His Majesty Nochtli left us with many legacies. Conquered lands, glories to celebrate, and children to honor. Few emperors expanded our borders as far as he did.” “He didn’t look like a warrior to me, all fat and heavy.” “His Majesty Nochtli let himself go in his tenure’s last season,” Tlacaelel replied. “Having worked himself to the bone the rest of the year, he decided to spend his final months in pleasure. I assure you, he was a force to behold in his heyday.” Had my predecessor surrendered himself to pleasure, or to despair? Maybe both? “I’m no warrior,” I said plainly. I’d been bitter over that truth once, but I had gotten over it since. “The teachers told me I would never become more than a pack carrier. How do you expect me to lead armies?” “The hassle of direct combat is beneath your dignity, Your Majesty. You are expected to lead common warriors, not fight shoulder-to-shoulder in the mud with them.” Tlacaelel chuckled to himself. “You sell yourself short too. We interrogated your teachers, who said you were studious and well-spoken, with excellent notes in history, astronomy, and scribework.” I had to. I’d trained to become a merchant, and the teachers would have made me a priest if I’d been better born. Since military arts were beyond me, I’d put all my efforts into improving my literacy. Scribing work paid well, and I couldn’t expect to sell anything to strangers without finding the right words. “That doesn’t translate into military prowess.” “You would be surprised,” Tlacaelel replied evasively. “To get back to your original question, all lives must end, but if they are spent well, then they end with no regret. I like to think His Majesty Nochtli died well and truly fulfilled.” I doubted that, considering how much he had screamed on the altar, but Tlacaelel’s words got me thinking. A life spent with no regrets… For the first time since I arrived here, I tried to imagine myself playing along with this farce. I glanced at the empty platter. A dish like this once a day sounded amazing enough. Yet from what Tlacaelel told me, I would never have cause to starve or complain. My eyes turned to one of the female servants; I couldn’t help but imagine Eztli in her place. I wondered how it would feel to touch her, to kiss her, to take her the way I’d seen Guatemoc mount Necahual some nights. Before today, the idea of finding a wife sounded almost absurd, let alone three thousand. Though classmates at school talked about it at length, I’d never known sex. If it was half as pleasant as others made it sound, then the year would be spent in bliss. “What other entertainment can this palace provide?” I asked. Tlacaelel raised his hands and started to raise a finger with each new option he presented. “It has hot baths, a gambling den, an arena, a private court for ball games, a dancing hall, a theater, woods for hunting, flower gardens…” “So much?” I asked, astonished. Was this place a city within the city? “How can they all fit together?” “The palace is five stories high, without including the basement below. Its splendor is second only to the Blood Pyramid.” Tlacaelel turned to face the obsidian window. “Last but not least, there’s the menagerie. You can see it outside.” I looked through the window and at the world below. Tlacaelel hadn’t lied. The palace was many floors high, and my chambers stood at the top of the world. A lush garden of rich black soil sprawled below us, filled with flower beds, exquisite topiaries, shrubs, verdant orchards, and colorful plants. I recognized a few, for Necahual used some of them for potion-making, but most were unknown to me. A stream flowed between trees and stone alcoves, holding beasts trapped within them: trihorns, baby longnecks, ocelots, monkeys… and even a couple of jaguars. I had only ever seen a jaguar once, when hunters killed one and brought the carcass back to Acampa. How impressive the corpse had looked, with its deadly claws and mighty muscles. That one must have been a child, for the two felines below put it to shame. How splendid they looked with their spotted fur and mighty claws. “Beautiful, aren’t they?” Tlacaelel asked mirthfully. “I can arrange a tour in the evening, if you would like it.” “Yes…” I whispered, amazed. “Let’s do that.” Perhaps… this wasn’t a bad deal after all. A year of bliss and joy instead of a lifetime of work. I never wished to become emperor, but maybe I could make the best of the situation. Some would have killed to have this opportunity. My hand moved to my forehead, where Necahual’s stones once hit me. She hadn’t been the only one to throw things at me—just the one who did it most often. While I did well at school, my classmates never accepted me as one of their own. Even if I’d become a merchant, I doubted the population would have warmed up to me. Now they had no choice but to worship me. A long life didn’t sound so good when filled with misery. Maybe I should give in. What joy was there in freedom when it tasted so bitter? One year of joy does sound better than a lifetime of contempt. That impression lasted until I noticed the walls beyond the garden. Thick red stone fortifications surrounded the menagerie and, indeed, the entire palace. Three stories tall, they were watched over by soldiers armed with spears and bows. Some looked outside at the city, and others surveyed the palace grounds. “Why walls?” I asked, my voice breaking in my throat. “Why are they so high?” Tlacaelel chuckled lightly. “Oh Emperor, you are the master of the earth. So many enemies of the empire and ungrateful rabble would do you harm without walls.” It was only half a lie. Pens did protect animals from danger. It also kept them trapped inside before dinnertime. My own pen just happened to include many small ones within itself. I suddenly found myself doubting everything. I glanced at my female attendants, and a strange question formed in my mind. “You didn’t mention males, Tlacaelel.” “I do not understand you, Your Majesty.” “You said I could have any woman,” I pointed out. “For a night or forever. But you never mentioned men.” For the first time in our entire conversation, Tlacaelel looked at me in genuine puzzlement. “Do you want to bed men, Your Majesty?” Not quite. I knew some boys at my school were intimate together, but I had only ever been attracted to girls. “I’m simply curious why you didn’t mention them.” “Ah, I see.” He chuckled to himself, as if I had relieved him of a burden. “Your Majesty, the gods gave us life so that we might return it to them in due time. Two men cannot bring new soldiers into the world, no more than two women can breed a craftsman. Yet our empire is short on both.” I sneered in utter disgust, “My loins are fit only to breed more tributes for the altars? Is that what you’re saying?” “All loins and wombs exist for this purpose, do they not?” And like that, I went right back to hating him. I glanced at the sky, at the world beyond these walls. I remembered my old dream of traveling to distant lands, of purchasing a boat and sailing into the sunset. “Will I ever leave this palace?” I wondered. “Could I see the sea?” “If the Nightlords wish for it, you will bless imperial armies in the field or attend diplomatic missions outside these walls,” Tlacaelel said with false kindness. “Some might take you to the coast.” If the Nightlords wish for it. They had given me a golden cage to wither away in. I couldn’t leave without their permission, and I would spend a year preparing for the next feast. All these pleasures offered to me were drugs meant to dull the senses. I was not a turkey happy to be fattened up for the slaughter, nor was I a slave happy in his servitude. I would not submit. I kept these rebellious thoughts close to my chest as Tlacaelel and the armed guards guided me out of the bedchambers, my predecessor’s skull in my hands. I carefully observed the soldiers as we walked. Though they avoided my gaze the best they could, I still managed to catch a glimpse of their eyes’ color. A dark shade of red. Other guards awaited beyond the wooden doors of my apartments and the polished marble walls of the corridors beyond them—all of them priests bound to the Nightlords. I suspected everyone with a weapon answered to the gods in these walls. I would find no listening ear here, no one to support a mutiny. Considering the palace’s size, the staff, and the great walls, escape sounded impossible. No, I mustn’t give up yet. My thoughts raced as two female servants fanned me to cool my body. We walked through elegant sets of wooden doors and golden curtains. After a few minutes, Tlacaelel finally led me to an ornate balcony on the palace’s roof. There has to be a way out. With no wall to block it anymore, the wind answered my thoughts with encouraging words. “There is a road to freedom, but it opens only to the brave.” For once, they sounded halfway reassuring. The grand balcony, which faced the Blood Pyramid too, housed a strange pyramid of the blackest obsidian, roughly the size of my old house. A curtain of red threads protected the entrance, its rippling patterns resembling a waterfall. The black pyramid shimmered in the sunlight as if it gorged on the light. “No one but the emperor may enter the sacred reliquary,” Tlacaelel said, stopping before the threshold. “No one will disturb His Majesty’s meditation.” “Not even the guards?” I asked. “You may shout for help if you require it, but none will enter uninvited.” No one but the dead. I glanced at the skull in my hands, then walked past the shimmering curtain and into the abode of the past emperors. They waited for me inside, all six hundred of them and some. A pillar of skulls stood firmly at the center of the cubical room, so far from the entrance that the sunlight would not touch it. The ground was made of obsidian, like the walls and room, plunging the place into near-complete darkness. The skulls sat atop each other in a chaotic pile, some big and cracked, others small and pristine. Time had fused them together, joining bones with bones into a twisted white trunk that reached all the way to the ceiling. I stared at this pile for the gods knew how long with the eerie silence for a lone companion. I tried to imagine how my own head would look once added to the pile. I couldn’t tell one emperor from another; all men looked the same in death. I would be no different. Just another corpse raising this ghastly monument a tiny bit higher. “Where would you have wanted to rest, Nochtli the Fourteenth?” I asked the skull in my hand. My eyes traveled from one side of the pillar to the other, looking for a spot to fit my predecessor. “Would you rather be facing the light or the dark?” In the end, it didn’t matter what the dead wanted. All spots facing the sun were taken by older skulls, but there were a few tiny spaces at the pillar’s back. I touched one with my hand to see if one more head would fit in. I felt something prick my thumb, followed by a sharp pain. I hastily took back my hand in surprise. Droplets of blood fell onto the ground, breaking the silence. I nearly called the guards, but bit my tongue to swallow a scoff of pain instead. I examined the spot and watched a sweet red drop hang from a black blade. An obsidian knife as thin as a needle and sharper than an axe was embedded into the pillar. The shadows made the dark glass nearly invisible. It took me a minute of slow, careful exploration until I could find the pommel and safely remove the weapon from its hiding spot. Why was it here? If Tlacaelel had spoken the truth, only emperors were allowed inside this room. My predecessor must have left it behind before his demise. I carefully examined the weapon, trying to guess the reason for its existence. Words were marked on the blade’s surface. For spite’s sake. I scoffed bitterly. A way out that opens only to the brave. I understand now. “You tried everything else, didn’t you?” I gazed into my predecessor’s empty eyes. “When you failed to escape, you left that for your successor. A parting gift.” I could have sworn the skull was grinning at me. I placed it in the now-empty spot, wondering why he didn’t go through with it himself. Maybe he’d intended to end his life on his tenure’s final day after enjoying himself, only for the Nightlords to drug him first? Or maybe he didn’t find the courage required in the end? I would never know. It was customary for warriors to take their own lives when threatened with capture and dishonor. Teachers at school said that those who did so earned their entrance to paradise, alongside warriors who had fallen in battle and women who had perished in childbirth. Would heaven’s door open even for me? I forgot how many minutes I spent holding the knife. Was it all a trick of the Nightlords, whose hidden hands were waiting to jump out of the darkness and stop me? A practical joke of some kind? I traced a line along my arm, as if to confirm I was indeed holding a real weapon. I winced in pain as a thin red wound opened on my skin. The weapon was real and sharp. Could I use it to fight my way out? No, that’d be absurd. I wouldn’t make it past the guards outside, let alone the walls. I could slice my own throat easily enough, or stab my own heart… It would be a quicker death than the one I could expect one year from now. “But what would it change? Nothing,” I told myself, my voice brimming with doubt. “It wouldn’t change anything. They’ll find someone else. Another dirt poor peasant who won’t mind. What would it change?” The Jaguar Woman’s words echoed in my mind. Our father’s altar will accept no other sustenance. I glanced at the mark on my chest, which marked me as the gods’ tribute. Come to think of it, my early death might actually have an impact. What did the priests teach me at school again? This sun is the final one. The gods have recreated mankind many times before and found us lacking. Should our faith and sacrifices fail to appease them, there will be no new chance this time. The First Emperor will fall from the sky to rain fire down upon us all, until everyone and everything is ash. My father and Guatemoc both doubted the stories, as did I. The Sapa did not sacrifice anyone, as far as I knew, and yet no wrathful sun burned them to cinders. What if I died and nothing happened? That would prove the gods were false, as the wind said. But if they were true—if the priests spoke the truth, if these sacrifices did indeed keep the cosmos running—then everybody would die. Everyone would perish because of me. The thought of Eztli burning in divine flames was enough to shake me to my core. I tried to tell myself I still had things to live for; Eztli, dreams of distant lands, the hope of finding a way out of this cage and sailing into the sunset, far away from the night’s grip. Should I wait a few more months in case I succeed where all six hundred of my predecessors have failed? These thoughts were foolish; wise scholars and mighty warriors bled on the altar alike. If my predecessor had left that knife behind, it meant everything else had failed. Perhaps I should just accept my fate with dignity, like my predecessors before me. “An empty soul is a bane upon a house. Even his mother didn’t want him.” My fingers tightened on the knife as I recalled Necahual’s words, her sneers… and so many others. “I will have none of your backtalk, insolent slave.” “Oh, I believe he does understand. More than the fools below.” “I’ll miss this one. I hope the next emperor will bring us luck.” Each memory was like a cursed needle poking my flesh. I recalled the backbreaking work, the insults, the glares. My heartbeat quickened with anger, my fingers trembling with rage. “Never give him meat, lest he develop a taste for human flesh.” It was then that I recalled the soothsayer’s words. Yet the gods’ servants served me fish for breakfast. They knew the superstition, but they ignored it. Yohuachanca’s people had shunned me all my life. I’d been abandoned by my birth mother, spat upon, ignored, and shunned. For nothing but lies. “Lies, lies, lies,” I grunted, all my doubts dispelled by anger. “I’ll just be more of the same!” The Nightlords expected me to swallow more falsehoods, to bear them like a good little dog. Just like Necahual and all the others. To bear their sins for them so they could close their eyes and call themselves good! Enough! I’ve had enough! “You want my heart, oh queens of the night?” I held onto the weapon with both hands, pointing it at my chest. Ironically enough, the Nightlords’ mark showed the perfect spot where to aim. “You shall find nothing there!” The soothsayer said my death would unleash evil upon the world. For once, I hoped she had been right. Let my final gift be a free man’s curse. Either the gods were true and the world would burn, or they were false and their lies would be exposed. Honestly? “I’m fine with either.” I gathered my breath and all my courage, then rashly drove the blade into my heart. I immediately regretted it. The knife sliced through my skin and feasted on my blood. Its tip slipped between my ribs, cut the arteries, and struck true. An agony greater than the Jaguar Woman’s grip seized my chest. A pressure crushed me from within before radiating outward to my arms, neck, and then stomach. It was as if a flame had burst to life within my rib cage and then spread a wave of flame through my flesh. It hurt. It hurt! I would have screamed if I could have done more than wheeze. I would have cursed my rashness if I could still think clearly. Fear obscured my mind and shadows twisted my vision. My limbs weakened, my knees called back to the ground. I collapsed onto the floor, coughing and bleeding and thrashing around. Everything was a blur afterward. I saw the obsidian blade buried in my chest shatter, for the Nightlords’ mark had grown a row of bloody fangs. It screamed like the mouth of a newborn, its screech loud enough to wake up stone. The alerted guards rushed past the curtain as I fell. Tlacaelel followed them, his placid expression twisted into a look of dread; whether he was fearing for his life or mine made no difference, the Nightlords would punish him either way. I was a virgin, but I’d still fucked him over. The pain was intense, but thankfully short. A terrible cold extinguished the fires that previously burned inside me. My body went numb. My mind no longer held sway over my body. I heard the wind blow triumphantly past the curtain. Is the world burning outside? Is the sun falling? “No,” the wind answered. It was all a lie. I knew it. It was all a lie. Another whispered into my ear, hissing in impotent rage. “You foolish, selfish child.” Tlacaelel raised a hand above my chest; the last thing I saw before I lost consciousness was a priest raising his weapon to cut the eunuch’s wrist. “There is no escaping your duty. Not even death can sever your worldly bonds.” I spat blood in his face. Darkness shrouded Tlacaelel and the guards alike. The shadows swallowed my vision and extinguished my senses. Yet I was no longer afraid. Instead, I felt relieved of a burden. Lighter. There was something trapped within me, a great power that the blade had freed. The knife had sliced through more than just flesh. It had severed invisible ropes I never noticed. I couldn’t explain it; I just knew. There were a thousand eyes watching me, blue flames burning in the dark, on the threshold between life and death. “We welcome thee, honored sorcerer, our successor and champion,” the dead emperors whispered. “Let the chaos winds carry thy black wings past the Gate of Skulls and into the Land of the Dead Suns.” This was not the end. Far from it. It was just the beginning. part0007. 2THE LAND OF THE DEAD SUNS Afire burned where my dead heart should have been. Its flames licked my ribs from within. My chest was a hearth and a furnace—a kiln that kept me warm in the dark. My hands and feet were cold. I had yet to hear of corpses that remained warm for long. Is this death? No heart pounded in my chest, nor did any pulse quicken my blood. My veins felt dust-dry, and my bones light as a feather. No breath escaped my mouth, nor did air fill my lungs. Am I dead? I sensed freezing water flowing on my skin. Rain. There was rain, faint and cold. Had my corpse been dragged into the open? I managed to open my eyes and watched purple droplets fall in front of me. Purple? My mind struggled back to consciousness. Purple rain? “My, my, my, what have we here?” A shadow loomed over me, its deep voice brimming with curiosity. “Long has it been since a Nahualli wandered through the Gate of Skulls.” The fire burning inside my chest provided a modicum of light, though too little to reveal more than the blackened bones keeping it trapped. I managed to turn my head just enough to get a glimpse of a mighty, furred leg thicker than a tree’s trunk and salivating fangs. I froze in dread. “Come on, I don’t bite,” the shadow said, which only made me doubt it further. “Let me take a look at your soul. I hope you are dog-faced.” I looked away from the beast, whatever it was. There was another light to be found ahead of me and whispers to be heard. “Rise up, Iztac Ce Ehecatl.” A thousand ghostly wisps gazed at me from the shadows and spoke with many hundred voices. “You are safe. The guide shall not harm you.” “Of course not,” said the shadow. “Do they not teach you of Xolotl’s good deeds in the living world?” Xolotl? It took me a while to recognize the name… and what it meant for me. They don’t sound like the wind. I tried to clear my mind. I remembered the blood on my chest, the fangs shattering my knife, and then closing my eyes into the silent dark. Nothing afterward. They’re… different. Old and young. I fumbled until I managed to rise back to my feet. From what I could tell, my arms and legs remained covered in flesh, though the flame in my chest left my ribs exposed. I found myself facing a dreadful beast and a pile of skulls. I almost stumbled when I met the former’s burning, fiery red eyes. A creature of twilight and shadows, the beast resembled a muscular hound the size of an adult trihorn, so large as to carry many men on its back. Its gleaming ebony fur shimmered in the ambient darkness. A headdress of vibrant feathers sat atop its skeletal visage, the color of which shifted with each blink of the eye. Its long white claws could easily gut me like a fish if it wanted to. His neck bore the markings of red symbols and ancient drawings. Its lithe form flickered and wavered like the first shadows cast by the setting sun. I recognized him from pictures shown during religious classes: Xolotl, a God-in-Spirit and guide to the dead. “A Tlacatecolotl?” The beast smelled me with a curious look and salivating fangs. “What a shame. At least that explains why you’re still fleshy.” “Tlacatecolotl?” I repeated, recognizing the word’s meaning as “owl-man.” My own voice sounded like a rasping rattle. “Yes, that’s what you are.” The creature regally sat on the cold floor, the rain flowing down his fur. “A little devil-bird of death.” I didn’t know what to say. If this was indeed Xolotl, then I was dead, and he would guide me to my proper afterlife as decided by the gods—gods I had deprived of a sacrifice. Scriptures said I should grovel and humbly ask for mercy, but I was done with begging and scrapping. “You are not dead yet, Iztac,” a hundred phantom voices whispered. “That mercy is denied to you.” The shadow around us dimmed to reveal a pillar of over six hundred skulls standing nearby. Their empty eyes gleamed with blue flames under the purple rain. They were all staring at me with grins, scowls, and frowns, with none of them looking the same. “You are…” I squinted at the dead emperors. “My predecessors?” “We are the Parliament of Skulls,” the pillar replied, a hundred emperors whispering as one. “Our bodies perished, but our hateful will lingers. Our dismembered souls are united in spirit.” “They make for nice conversation if you can look past the spiteful vows of revenge,” Xolotl mused. His tail wagged from one side of his body to the other. “Who knew severed heads could be so bitter?” If I was speaking to Xolotl and the previous emperors, then I was indeed dead and buried. The thought filled me not with fear but with relief. I’d perished on my terms and spat upon the “gods” while at it. “I am honored to stand before you, guide of the dead and honored spirits,” I said, bowing before them all. “Have you come to guide me through the Underworld?” “You are already below ground, little bird,” Xolotl said with a chuckle. “But I only guide the dead. You will have to find your own way downstairs.” He only guided the dead? Was I not a corpse now, though? “We are not truly dead, Iztac, however we might wish for it.” The skulls of my predecessor grunted in rage. “The vampire’s kiss denies its victims a peaceful rest. So long as the Nightlords linger among the living, we are trapped on the threshold, unable to move on. Should you fail to escape, this too shall be your fate.” My heart would have skipped a beat if I still had one. “Am I not dead already?” “No, you aren’t,” Xolotl said with a light chuckle. “Your Teyolia, your life-fire, still burns bright, and you’ve flesh all over your bones. Take a good look below if you wish to see the true corpses.” I knew better than to not listen to the dead’s guide. I glanced around at my surroundings and found myself in some sort of ruined temple’s hall. Rubble and debris littered the paved floor, and holes in the ceiling let purple rain fall through. Cracks and crevices marked marble columns bearing engravings of skeletons. A vast hole dropped straight through the ground next to the Parliament of Skulls and opened up a makeshift balcony to the world outside. I approached the edge and gazed at the strange realm beyond these walls. Purple rain clouds flooded a dead land under the faint light of a fading sun. The world outside was a dreadful, sorrowful place; a vast expanse of moldy ruins half-sunken into tangled swamps and fetid marshes. Broken towers and obsidian pillars rose up from poisonous bogs whose nauseating smell made me want to puke. Enormous weeds covered ancient plazas ravaged by time. Everywhere I looked, I saw disparate monuments and decrepit temples whose architectural styles I did not recognize. Some pyramids were smooth, whereas Yohuachanca’s instead incorporated steps. Houses of faded gold slumbered in the mud next to cracked stone bridges and defaced marble statues. Such a jungle should have sung with the buzzing of flies and the song of birds, but only the sound of falling rain echoed from it. The plants lacked colors, their leaves tainted brown or violet. Even the vines looked more like chalky serpents than living creatures. And the sun… the sun was black in the sky, yet dripping a pillar of ephemeral purple light onto a purple sea fueled by the rain. Its light was that of a dying sunset—the last rays that preceded the fading darkness. I was so amazed that I almost missed the sight of a corpse falling down from above. I looked down below at a plaza that somehow managed to remain dry in the middle of a downpour. A dozen fleshless skeletons waited there, their legs carrying their lanky frames among the shadows. Their empty eyes shone with a bright glow full of intellect. I watched on in silence as a new skeleton fell from the rain clouds and shattered in half upon the ground. The walking dead gathered around their new friend and swiftly worked to put the broken pieces back together. They did a good job at it, though the newcomer ended up missing a few fingers and ribs. “Oops, my queen will have much work to do with that one,” Xolotl said. “At least he still has a pelvis.” “What…” My voice died in my throat as I gazed at the faded sun. “What is this place?” “The Land of the Dead Suns, of course,” Xolotl replied with a snort. “Where do you think suns go when they die, huh? Men or stars, gods or beasts, everything ends up down there in time.” “The Land of the Dead Suns houses all that is dead and forgotten,” the Parliament whispered. “Not just the souls of the living. Many fallen civilizations, extinct languages, and lost treasures have sunk into its depths.” I’d been told the Underworld was a cavern on which no sun shone, so deep and dark that it covered nine whole levels full of dangers. None of my teachers ever mentioned a land of ruins and purple rain. “If that is a dead sun…” I pointed at the eclipsed star in the sky. “Then that must be Chalchiuhtlicue?” “Yes, she is,” the Parliament of Skulls answered me. “The goddess of water and fourth sun, whose tears of sorrow flooded the world.” A droplet slipped between my ribs and filled me with a shiver before turning to steam. It forced me to take a good, hard look at my chest. Neither skin nor flesh covered my blackened bones there, allowing me to peek at what burned between them: a purple brazier without fuel yet encircled by four phantom ropes. To my horror, each of them bore one of the Nightlords’ favorite colors. “What is this?” I rasped in confusion. This flame’s baleful gleam put me ill at ease. Its very existence felt unnatural. “The Nightlords shackled your Teyolia, your life-fire, to their ritual,” the Parliament explained. “So long as they haunt the world, they can call you back to the land of the living.” “You’re here on vacation, so to say,” Xolotl said with a shrug. “They’ll pull you back up soon.” The Parliament grunted in resentment. “You cannot be killed before the Scarlet Moon, Iztac, but you will die a half-death then. Your blood and lifeforce will be feasted upon, and your skull will join us in torment.” I cursed upon remembering Tlacaelel’s warning that no power would sever my worldly bonds. To think my leash extended even beyond death’s door… “Then it was all for nothing…” What little pride I’d found in my demise evaporated, replaced with sorrow. “The gods cannot be denied.” Xolotl exploded in laughter, much to my confusion. “The true gods are all dead, child. They sacrificed themselves to lift the sun and moon. They’ve earned their rest.” “You are mistaken, our successor,” the Parliament replied, much to my shock. “Though they are powerful, the Nightlords are not gods. Never been. We watched them scream and bleed more than once.” The boast sounded so fantastical that I almost contested it. Yet for a second, I imagined myself driving a sword through the Jaguar Woman’s heart. What would she bleed then? Red or black? Blood or dust? I remembered the wind’s final words as darkness claimed me; that though I had stabbed my own heart before the anointed time, the sun still remained high in the sky. “So I was right?” The flame within my chest grew brighter with my anger. “The tributes, the scriptures… They are all lies?” Xololt nodded calmly, confirming my suspicions. “No gods linger among the living, child. The vampires that replaced them are frauds, and their empire a house of sand.” “The first of us remember the days before Yohuachanca’s rise, when the nights were long,” the Parliament answered. “The Nightlords and their kin descended from the north and turned the dark into a time of terror. ‘Either they would take some lives or all of them,’ they said. The priests came after. Once everyone who knows the truth perishes, the lies become the rules. Our sacrifices quench the Nightlords’ thirst and strengthen their magic, nothing more.” I’d long suspected the gods—no, the Nightlords—of being false, but hearing it from the tongues of the previous emperors only filled me with further disgust. Just as the soothsayer condemned me over a superstition, these false deities shackled minds with falsehood. It was just more of the same. And if the Parliament was correct, then my attempt at exposing them would lead nowhere. Death earned me a respite, a peek through the veil, and nothing more. Was there no escape? Something bothered me. “If I’m not dead yet, then how am I here?” I asked Xolotl, squinting at the deity. “And you look pretty alive for a dead god.” “I have long since perished; this is true,” Xolotl replied with a canine’s grin. “But in the Land of the Dead Suns, it is always possible to be deader. One’s demise is no barrier for our magic. I thought a Tlacatecolotl would understand it.” I frowned in confusion. “You speak this word as if it means anything to me.” “Ah, I see how it is.” Xolotl licked his fangs. “This is your first flight.” “Look upon your reflection, Iztac Ce Ehecatl.” The Parliament of Skull grinned at me. “Gaze upon your Tonalli.” Utterly confused, I looked for the nearest puddle and gazed at my mirrored face. What I could see at least. My chest wasn’t the only part of my anatomy that had changed drastically. A black wooden mask hid the upper half of my visage from the world, and a beak protected my nose. My pale blue eyes remained, with the irises having expanded to cover the sclera. I immediately recognized what this face symbolized. An owl. An owl-man. “What is this witchery?” I touched my face to make sure I was indeed staring at my reflection and not some illusion. My fingers caressed my nose-beak and brushed against my mask. Both had merged with my flesh, leaving my hair, ears, and mouth exposed. “I can’t take it off.” “This is your true self, Iztac,” the Parliament answered calmly. “The Tlacatecolotl, owl-demon, and destroyer of men. Born in the Wind Month on a day under the sign of the crocodile. Your life-fire is the accursed flame that kindles disaster.” I stared at my reflection, unable to believe my own eyes. A black owl stared back at me, an omen of death and doom. I knew the tales; when a mortal heard an owl howl in the night, then their life would be forfeit come morning. The night hunters served the Gods-in-Spirit who dwelled in the Underworld. They stole souls and carried them into the darkness without light. The hag’s words rang in my skull. “This boy is born possessed… Do not slay him, for his death will unleash the trapped spirit.” It can’t… It can’t be true… “Lies! Lies, lies, lies!” I pointed a finger at the Parliament, the flame inside my chest now so bright as to eclipse their own glow. “This is all superstition! I am human! I have eaten meat without feasting on human flesh! Nothing is true!” The Parliament of Skulls remained unwavering. “There are truths whose meanings have been deformed by time. You are not possessed by a magical being, Iztac; you are one.” “Why such a reaction, sorcerer?” Xolotl’s head tilted to the side, his eyes burning with curiosity. “You should be glad of the gift bestowed upon you. Few can boast of traveling into the Underworld while they still live.” In my foolishness, I glared back at the deity. “How would you react if you had been stoned all your life for being cursed… and then realized it might have been true?” “I would devour those who dared challenge me,” Xolotl replied with a cruel laugh. “You should do the same. Most Tlacatecolotl return insults visited upon them tenfold with curses and spells.” “The living fear what they do not understand,” the Parliament added calmly. “But you were not cursed, Iztac. You were blessed. Powerful magic is yours to command.” I shut my mouth, suddenly intrigued. Powerful magic? I’d learned to be fearful of it when the Jaguar Woman strangled me with the power of her mind. “Interested, are you?” Xolotl’s tail undulated behind him and left shimmering motes of darkness in its wake. “Then… perhaps we could make a deal. Form a contract.” “Beware, Iztac Ce Ehecatl,” the Parliament of Skulls warned me immediately. “Gods drive a hard bargain for their knowledge.” Xolotl scoffed, “You wound me, oh pile of skulls. Do I not shepherd the dead out of the kindness of my heart?” “Your current task is punishment for past cowardice,” the Parliament replied coldly. “If you had any choice in the matter, you would have devoured our successor.” The saliva dripping from Xolotl’s fangs suddenly became quite an ominous warning. Yet I couldn’t suppress my curiosity. The idea of strangling the Jaguar Woman with her own magic simply wouldn’t leave my mind. And if Xolotl was a true god, then his power should be greater indeed. “What am I?” I asked warily. “I want to know the truth. The whole truth.” Xolotl’s eyes flickered. “Have you heard voices carried by the wind?” My fists clenched on their own. “I have.” “There are rare people born with white hair and pale eyes.” The Parliament of Skulls let out a deep rattle. It reminded me of a storyteller gathering their breath before a performance. “Fools call them empty hearts, but open hearts would have been truer. They are Nahualli, sorcerers whose Tonalli, their will, is attuned to the invisible realms. They hear the voices of spirits, and the strongest of them can shift into their animal spirit.” The voices of spirits? Did the wind carry the whispers of the dead to my ears this whole time? A thought suddenly crossed my mind. “Do the Nightlords know?” I asked. “Of course,” the Parliament replied. “I suspect you were chosen because you were Nahualli rather than in spite of it. Your blood, rich in magic, will make for a better offering.” The more I learned of the Nightlords, these so-called “vampires,” the more I hated them. I suddenly wondered if the soothsayer asked for everyone not to harm me only so I could become a false god’s meal. “A few of us were Nahualli ourselves,” the Parliament said, “but never a Tlacatecolotl. This secret is known only to the dead. Your Tonalli is the devil-owl, the Underworld’s messenger, who moves freely between life and death.” “This is why you stand before us with flesh over your bones,” Xolotl explained. “Unlike most Nahualli, the Tlacatecolotl’s spirit can travel to the Underworld while they still live. Had you been a mere human, the vampires’ curse would have denied you entrance to this place entirely.” “Then they don’t know I’m here?” If vampires had never died, then they couldn’t possibly learn of this trip of mine. “This could be an advantage.” “Indeed.” The Parliament’s countless teeth ground together. “None of us could walk among the lost. There are ancient secrets buried in the Land of the Dead Suns. Secret spells and powerful magic the Nightlords know nothing of.” “Can you teach me?” I asked warily. “How does it work?” “Learning spells is simple for a Tlacatecolotl, little bird.” Xolotl’s eyes gleamed with a baleful glow that reminded me of the Nightlords. “You can find many teachers and patrons in this barren land… but you must give before you receive.” A black tongue stuck from between the hound’s fangs. “I would pay a fair price for a taste of living human flesh.” The memory of my predecessor and his consorts being devoured alive by the Nightlords flashed in my mind, vivid and raw. “No way!” I recoiled from the god in disgust. “I am no one’s meal!” “Come on, just a taste,” the hungry god pleaded for his treat. His skeletal nose expelled a cloud of black vapor. “You smell so good and warm… Let me chew your flesh just once. I swear I won’t break a bone!” “No!” I hadn’t tried to escape a false deity’s altar to nourish a real one. “I refuse! Ask for something else!” An unsettling chorus erupted from the Parliament of Skulls, a ghostly symphony so terrifying that it stopped Xolotl and me dead in our tracks. A different lament emanated from each of the emperors’ heads; mournful moans and macabre rattling joined together into an anguished scream. “Enough.” The skulls shifted and ground against one another to better look at me. “Iztac Ce Ehecatl, our successor, do you understand what fate awaits you?” I saw hundreds of tragic tales in the skulls’ ghostly eyes—the echoes of rich lives that had met the same gruesome ending. The same that awaited me if I failed. “The Nightlords will not let you rest for long,” the pillar confirmed. “Many of us have tried to take our lives; some tried to rip out their own heads, and others immolated themselves until they became ash. No matter how we fell, be it in battle, by our own hands, or from countless other things, each time we were brought back until the night of the Scarlet Moon. You must slay the sisters before that date, Iztac. Otherwise, your skull will join us in our suffering.” I had a year to destroy four vampires worshiped as gods by my people. The task sounded simple enough, and impossible to achieve. “How can they even be destroyed?” I asked warily. “I am no warrior born. Must I drag them into the sunlight by word or trickery?” “The Nightlords are old and clever,” the Parliament admitted. “Many emperors tried to overthrow them with strength and cunning. They failed, for they were mortal men.” This did not reassure me. “What chance do I have, then?” “A slim one,” the Parliament said flatly. At least it spoke the blunt truth. “None of us could hear our predecessors’ whispers and learn from their experiences. Nor could we wield the kind of magic that is only found in the Land of the Dead Suns. With our guidance and your gifts, you might prevail.” Might, not will. The odds were long, and success wasn’t guaranteed. These words would have filled me with doubt once, but no more. I’d been ready to kill myself for a chance at victory. I would not waver again. The cacophony of voices converged until the Parliament’s words merged into a single utterance. “Hence, we ask you a question.” All past emperors spoke to me at once. “What would you sacrifice to drag these leeches off their throne? What would you sacrifice to change your fate?” My lips twisted into a scowl. Did they even need to ask? I pointed at my burning chest, right where I planted a knife into my heart. “Everything,” I replied. “I’d do anything and everything.” The skulls’ toothy grins widened, their owners pleased. “Then, until this task is achieved, we shall guide thy steps. Our hands are tied, but our knowledge is vast. The Land of the Dead Suns is a realm full of ancient secrets and forbidden spells. There are powers here that can destroy even the Nightlords.” I clenched my fists. “But none of them will be earned for free.” “Although none of us were Tlacatecolotl, we included Nahualli among our numbers. We can teach you a little magic ourselves. The rest you must learn from others.” The pillar’s eyes glanced at Xolotl, who showed remarkable patience for a hungry hound bigger than a wagon. “A god’s word, once given, cannot be taken back. By the covenant’s terms, they must abide.” I considered his words. My eyes darted to Xolotl, who smiled back at me. I did not trust him, but if he was indeed bound by his word then I could negotiate terms. I didn’t relish feeding myself to another, but when the alternative involved being sacrificed as a slave and an eternity of suffering… I bore insults and stoning for dignity’s sake. I could endure far more in the name of power and freedom. “What do you offer?” I warily asked Xolotl. “Ah, now we’re talking.” The dog god licked his mighty paw. “I could teach you the secret of turning yourself into a beast.” “A trihorn?” I asked, unable to suppress my excitement. Many times, I fantasized about crushing Necahual underfoot as a great scaled beast. “Could I become a feather tyrant?” “I’m afraid not,” Xolot replied, much to my disappointment. “A Nahualli is no skinwalker. They may only shift into their chosen spirit animal. An owl is no jaguar, I’ll admit, but cats cannot fly, do they?” “We can teach our successor this secret ourselves,” the Parliament of Skulls interjected. “Offer him more.” “If you ask so nicely…” Xolotl chuckled darkly. “How about I teach you Spiritual Manifestation? A powerful discipline.” I frowned at him and waited for him to elaborate. I’d noticed most people tried to fill silence whenever pressed. The fact that the Parliament remained quiet meant this information interested them too. “Most Nahualli shapeshift their body, little bird, but the Tlacatecolotl transmutes the spirit. The old heads can teach you how to transform into an owl in the Land of the Dead Suns. Once you return to your body, though, you will no longer fly.” Xolotl licked his paw. “But if I were willingly to give you a drop of my divine blood… your Tonalli would grow strong enough to manifest itself among the living.” “Like a ghost?” I tried to grasp the concept. “You would teach me to summon my own specter?” “You’ll still be alive, but your Tonalli shall take physical form in the world above. It’ll be a guardian spirit you can command at will.” The idea of sending an animal ghost to haunt the Nightlords appealed to me. “I’m interested.” “This will cost you more than a taste, greedy little bird,” Xolotl mused. “I return your question: what do you offer for this knowledge?” Gods drove a hard bargain, but an idea crossed my mind. “How can I come back here?” I asked. “Can I return to the Underworld even if the Nightlords pull me back to the land of the living?” “Of course.” The dog god cackled in amusement. “You only need to die, or the more boring option of going to bed.” “Sleep is the little death,” the Parliament explained. “Now that your Tonalli has awakened, Iztac, we can guide your soul into the Land of the Dead Suns when you dream. But beware—your destruction in this place means the death of the mind. Your body will endure as a hollow husk before the Scarlet Moon, and nothingness will be your afterlife.” I honestly wondered if it would be worse than an eternity spent trapped in a pillar of skulls. I quickly decided both were equally horrible. “But would my injuries translate from one world to the other?” “No,” Xolotl replied. “The body and soul are separate. I’m not truly tasting your flesh, only its spirit.” “Then here’s my offer.” I extended my left hand to better entice him. “Teach me Spiritual Manifestation, and I will let you taste my arm each time I visit the Underworld.” “Bold.” The dog god licked his fangs. He reminded me of a child who had been caught glancing at sweet honey. He tried to look aloof but failed to hide his hunger. “I should get a taste of your meat first and see if you’re worth gnawing a hundred times more.” It seems even gods weren’t beneath haggling. “I’ve yet to see a merchant that lets a customer eat a meal without a promise to pay for it,” I pointed out. “As you said, you must give before you receive.” “Clever boy to use my words against me.” My answer amused Xolotl. I took it as a good sign. “Very well, I accept your terms. Stay still.” I did not move an inch as Xolotl raised his paw above my chest and bit into his own flesh. His fangs grazed his fur, just deep enough for a drop of black blood to drip from his wound. I watched it fall through the cracks between my ribs with a clenched jaw. The pain was sharp and sudden. My entire body warmed up from within. The fire within me burst with renewed brilliance, unleashing a pulse of heat through my bones. I collapsed on my hands in surprise. My throat dried up, and my sweat turned into steam. “Do you feel my power coursing through you?” Xolotl’s jaws snapped open. “Good. Meditate on my generosity as I take my prize.” His fangs closed on my left arm as he tasted my flesh. The dog god hadn’t lied. He did not break my bones, nor did he rip my arm off, though he had the power to. Gods had a more delicate palate than that. Xolotl savored the sweat on my skin and the warm blood dripping between his jaws. What made the latter so appetizing to true and false gods alike, I couldn’t tell. It said something about the excruciating agony of a stabbed heart that a giant dog chewing my flesh felt almost tolerable in comparison. Other sensations distracted me. The noise of droplets hitting the floor grew sharper and stronger. The smell of my own blood filled my nostrils with new flavors—the rusty scent of the purple rain; the dust in the air; the chalky odor of the emperors’ skulls. When my eyes looked at my blood-soaked left arm, my nails had lengthened. They were sharp. Sharp as a bird’s talons. “Shifting already?” Xolotl let my arm go, just in time for black feathers to cover my bloodied skin. “I should have known you would taste like a bird.” I stopped to think rationally when I sensed my nose and jaws merging into a beak. The fire within my chest unleashed a pulse of power that convulsed my body. My bones twisted in new and interesting ways, my muscles tightened, and smooth black feathers sprouted out of my soft skin. My hands retracted inside my arms, the fingers consumed by the transformation. New sensations filled my mind and replaced old ones. My gaze was attuned to the darkness, which held no secrets for me anymore. I felt light, so quick and unburdened. My arms stretched into wings and my legs into mighty talons. I fought the overwhelming urge to take flight, though I wondered if I should. My wounded arm’s injuries healed on their own, and my human frailty was swiftly replaced with an overwhelming feeling of power and freedom. My hands were gone, the fingers having merged into my bones. My wings were long and strong, and I dearly wished to stretch them. The water puddles on the ground no longer reflected a man, but I was not an owl either. I was something in between, a beast of legends whose talons could carry a llama away without a single sound. My skeletal chest remained exposed, the fire within pulsating with divine magic. “Beautiful,” the skulls whispered. “A mighty demon you will become.” “Changing into your spirit animal is easy with divine blood,” Xolotl said, licking my blood off his fangs. “Manifesting it above ground only requires you to wish so, at a cost. Maintaining the manifestation will tire your mind and body. You’ll get used to it over time.” “More,” I rasped through my beak. The transformation’s lingering pain paled before the pleasure of this power coursing through my veins. I reveled in it. “I need more magic.” “Then you earn it. Strengthen your Teyolia’s fire and hunt down the gods for their secrets.” After watching a new skeleton falling from the sky and into the plaza above, Xolotl rose back to his feet. “You were delicious, Iztac, but now work calls to me. I’ll be sure to extract my payment when you return.” Xolotl let out a low, rumbling growl—a noise that sounded like distant thunder rolling across the heavens. The skeletons froze in place, their silent gaze turning toward their guide. The hound leaped off our crumbling room to join them. His legs moved with a grace and purpose that belied his imposing form and casual way of speaking. “Follow me, oh voiceless dead!” Xolotl called out to the skeletons and gathered them. “The road will be long and many perils await you, but I swear on my honor as a god: I shall shepherd thee safely into the halls of Mictlan! Gather behind me!” I watched the skeletons gather around the deity for a second, but I couldn’t hold back the urge to take flight any longer. I spread my wings under the eclipsed sun. “The Nightlords will recall you soon,” the Parliament warned me. “If you are discovered, they won’t let you come back here. Bide thy time, play the fool, and grow in strength. Strike when ready and no sooner.” I barely listened. I could not listen. I was a man drunk on chicha, heedless of truth and danger alike. I leaped into the air, the rain bouncing off my black feathers. The dead on the plaza below cowered as my shadow passed over them. I paid them no mind. Because I was flying. I was flying. I ascended higher with each flap of my mighty wings. Their wingspan stretched farther than a wagon’s length, and their power carried me above the marsh. My body moved on its own, guided by an instinct that had slumbered within me for a lifetime. I soared above noxious marshes. Where the forgotten ruins sank into the mire, I aimed to catch the fading sun. I am free. I basked in this blissful sensation. The joy of knowing that nothing could touch me, that nothing below could drag me down to earth. I was drunk on this feeling. No one can reach me above the clouds. I ascended higher and higher, challenging the rain and the wind. The ruined lair of the Parliament of Skulls became a distant mote of stone below me. As for Xolotl, he vanished from my sight. Everything looked so small from above. It was exhilarating. I could have flown for a lifetime. Then my masters tugged the leash. The chains inside my chest tightened on the flame of my soul. They dimmed its light back to smoldering embers, and the magic that coursed through my body turned into a wave of cold helplessness. “No!” I shrieked in anger, my vision fading. “No! Not now!” But my pleas went unanswered. The world around me darkened once again as my spirit was dragged out of the Underworld and back into the land of the living. In my haste and arrogance, I had forgotten a simple truth. I had become a bird, but I was still a caged one. I awoke back in my royal bed. My first act was to scream. I shrieked loud enough to wake the dead—not out of fear, but out of rage. I’d gotten a taste of freedom and felt it yanked away from me. My skin was no longer covered in protective feathers; instead, it was smooth and weak. My owlish beak had snapped back open into my mouth and nose. The veil of darkness was impenetrable to my eyes once again. A heart thrummed inside a prison of flesh where a fire once burned. I had been cast down to earth like a crippled bird. “Shush,” a gentle voice whispered to me, melodious and soothing. “It is all right, my child.” A hand as cold as ice touched my forehead. My boiling blood slowed down instantly, and my pulse lessened. A wave of eerie calmness and serenity smothered my anger. A chill traveled across my body, relaxing my muscles and soothing my pain. The mark on my chest glowed vividly in the dark, and my body went limp. Although I could not raise a finger, I did manage to look up. The pale moonlight that filtered through the obsidian window gave me a glimpse of the shadow looming over me. I realized that my head did not rest on a pillow but on a woman’s lap. She was, without a doubt, a vision of heaven. Raven hair cascaded down her shoulders in stark contrast with her crescent-shaped, flower-adorned headdress. A garland of mayflower, water lilies, and sweet amapola reflected the moonlight outside almost as much as her golden necklace and earrings. Her dress, woven from white vines and red petals, revealed just enough of her legs and cleavage to allure men without verging on the scandalous. The woman smiled at me the way Necahual greeted Eztli fondly in the morning; she looked almost motherly. But even the most beautiful flowers could reek of deadly poison. Her eyes, crimson like the bloody moon, hinted at a predatory hunger. Red paint ominously covered her forehead—or perhaps it was dried blood, I couldn’t tell. Her sweet smell was that of a garland laid upon a fresh grave. I’d never seen her without a mask or robes, but I identified her voice. She had interceded in my favor when the Jaguar Woman strangled the life out of me. Yoloxochitl, the Flower of the Heart; the Nightlord of the South; said to be the most compassionate of the lot and yet the slowest to forgive a slight.; feared and adored in equal measures. Above all—a false goddess. A false goddess who could bring the dead back to life to punish them some more. My eyes darted to the mark on my chest. No scars remained from the knife that had once stabbed it. My heart thrummed in my chest, bustling with life. “Worry not, I’ve healed your wounds.” Her slender, cold fingers brushed against my cheek. I would have recoiled from her touch if my neck wasn’t so… relaxed. “You can rest easy. Your fight for survival is over, Iztac.” Her serene words awakened a fire within my heart. It boiled beneath my chest, beneath the skin and the flesh, a power unknown to the Nightlords and hidden from all. It was a secret between the dead and me. I had returned from the Underworld and carried something back with me to the mortal world. A winged shadow with the urge to tear out a vampire’s throat. The Flower of the Heart believed the battle was over, that they had clipped my wings and shown me the futility of it all. She couldn’t be more wrong. I remembered the Parliament’s advice: to bide my time, play the fool, grow in strength, and strike when ready. I would follow it scrupulously. My secret war had begun. And I had a year to win it. part0008. 3LOVE AND HATE Ihad rarely rested my head on a woman’s lap, let alone a vampire’s. It was… comfortable. And dreadful. Yoloxochitl’s skin was colder than Eztli’s, and though her smile was warm, the air was fraught with danger. I could cut the tension with an obsidian knife… or an owl’s talon. I desired nothing more than to summon my Tonalli to rip Yoloxochitl to shreds. The magic stirred within me, waiting for the word to strike. I restrained myself. I would have only one chance to take the Nightlord by surprise, and failure meant the end of all my hopes. “How does it feel?” Yoloxochitl softly asked me. “To die?” A flash of pain raced through my chest as I remembered plunging a knife into it. While what awaited me after crossing death’s door wasn’t so terrible, I only had one word to describe the process. “Terrible.” Yoloxochitl shook her head with a sigh. “Why did you do such an awful thing to yourself, Iztac?” To escape you. As I thought that, my eyes were darting around the room. If the other Nigthlords hid nearby in the dark, I couldn’t detect them. The bedroom appeared empty. To spite you, because you’re a demon. The Nightlord’s smile morphed into a scowl. “Iztac, you need not be so sullen. It would be easier if you told me what weighs on your chest.” The fact that I’ve met a real god, and he told me you were a fraud. A dangerous fraud. Of course, I kept that to myself and changed the subject. I tried to appear fearful and cowed, so she wouldn’t suspect anything. “What will happen to me?” “Nothing.” My shock must have shown on my face, for Yoloxochitl smiled kindly at me. I couldn’t even tell if it was sincere or not. “Sister Ocelocihuatl wanted you tortured for your transgression, but I put an end to it.” It sounded halfway plausible—the Jaguar Woman had threatened me with punishment already—but Yoloxochitl would find no gratitude in my reborn heart. Not after what I’d learned. This woman wanted to kill me for show. Her concern was a mask woven with lies. Yet she managed to sound so genuine and so sorry for me that I almost believed her. “To try taking your own life… It is such a sad act.” Yoloxochitl’s cold, dead hand brushed against my hair. I recoiled a bit, much to her confusion. “Your mother never touched you like this? “No.” Necahual’s cruel words flowed back into my mind, each of them another stab into my heart: even his mother didn’t want him. “She abandoned me at birth.” I’d never known her. I barely even knew how she looked. Father never spoke of her while he lived, and the other villagers remained tight-lipped. I only managed to coax a few details from Guatemoc while he was drunk: that my mother was a white-haired witch who brought misfortune to my father’s house. All I had was her name: Ichtaca. “I see…” Yoloxochitl’s eyes fluttered with what could pass for sadness. “And the woman who took you in? Did she truly throw stones at you?” “She did,” I admitted. Did vampires feed on my bad memories as much as my blood? Why was a Nightlord asking me this? “She hated me and saw me as a burden.” As for her husband, I was a worker, never a son. Only Eztli truly cared. “I understand you more now; why you tried to cut your own heart open.” Yoloxochitl’s hand moved to my chest. A chill ran through my skin when she touched me. “It was filled with sorrow, and you tried to alleviate the pain the best you could.” The worst part was that she wasn’t too far from the truth. I tried to kill myself because being emperor had been one insult too many. “Something like that.” “I never bore children of my own, Iztac,” the Nightlord whispered. Was that a hint of pain I detected in her voice? “I wanted to once, but our father… blessed me first. He could never control his thirst.” Blessed? Her wording caused me to frown in puzzlement. I had been taught that the Nightlords were born as goddesses sired by the divine First Emperor. I immediately tried to fish for more information. “He fed on your blood too?” “It takes more than blood to sate a god’s thirst,” Yoloxochitl answered with a sweet smile. I immediately felt I had overstepped. She had raised the walls around her heart, and it would take time to bring them down. “Goddesses like us can’t bear life, Iztac. Immortality withers the womb, but the desire never left me.” She was human once. The realization hit me like a lightning bolt. Like the Nightkin. “So I settled on adoption,” Yoloxochitl whispered. Her head cocked to the side, toward the obsidian window. “The world is full of lost children in need of love. It is a holy duty for those who adopt them to provide it. Home is more than a roof over one’s head. True love is a fire that keeps us warm at night.” “I had that once with Father,” I whispered. But then he died, and though Eztli did her best, I never felt fully welcomed in Guatemoc’s household. “It saddens me that you’ve suffered so much.” Yoloxochitl bent a little and kissed me on the forehead as if I were her own son. Her cold lips sent shivers down my spine; she was so close that I could confirm that she did not breathe unless she needed to speak. “I may not be allowed to claim you as my child, Iztac, but I swear to you. I shall soothe your wounded heart and fill it with happiness.” Somehow, that promise filled me with greater unease than the Jaguar Woman’s threats. I locked eyes with the Nightlord, whose eyes brimmed with concern and… something else. Something unsettling and dangerous. I couldn’t put my finger on why, but I could feel it in my bones. Yoloxochitl sounded genuine when she promised me happiness and fake when she pretended to be a goddess. Either she was an amazing liar or a poor one. Her actions didn’t add up. And her eyes… Her eyes looked so much like Eztli’s. She is sincere. When I realized it, my heart skipped a beat in shock. Her compassion is genuine. I remembered how Yoloxochitl tried to convince the Jaguar Woman not to torture me at my coronation. Though I had been chosen as emperor, she truly felt sorry for my circumstances. Much like Eztli before her. For a moment, I didn’t know what to do. I wanted to hate her—she shackled me like the other Nightlords—but to know that she truly intended to make the last year of my life a happy one out of the kindness of her heart… No one had showed me true compassion since Eztli. I felt so conflicted. Yoloxochitl squinted at me. “You do not believe me?” Damn it, my unease had shown. Quick, Iztac, think of something. “I…” “You do not need to lie,” Yoloxochitl interrupted me with a warm smile that showed her pointed fangs. “I understand. After suffering so many wounds, any kindness must reek of falsehood to you.” She lifted the power that bound my muscles with a wave of her hand. I slowly and carefully raised my head, half-expecting the axe to fall at any time. It did not. “Allow me to back my words with action, Iztac,” Yoloxochitl said upon stepping off of the bed. She looked like such a lovely creature, so slender and ethereal. Many men would have killed for the privilege of worshiping her at her feet. I was not one of them. “I have a gift for you.” “A gift?” I asked warily. The poisoned kind? Yoloxochitl nodded calmly. She waved at me, inviting me to join her. I stepped off the bed with only a cotton loincloth to hide my nakedness. She took my hand into her own and smiled at my skittishness. “Do not be shy, Iztac,” the Nightlord said, her fingers as cold as ice. “We finished selecting your consorts.” The prospect of having a wife, let alone four, would have delighted me once, but now… now I realized whoever the Nightlords picked would share my fate. They would be killed for nothing. “You know that each of us Nightlords pick a consort?” Yoloxochitl asked me. “I hesitated a long time about my choice. My sisters have preferences, but what I care most for is our emperor’s happiness.” I doubt that. “I sought to select the perfect companion for you. Someone who will care and die for you.” Yoloxochitl’s face beamed with pride. “When the priests told me about your life’s story, I immediately knew who I should choose. I met the girl, and she was such a lovely creature… albeit saddled with a terrible mother and a drunkard for a father. The most beautiful flowers always find a way to bloom, even in the poorest soil.” My blood froze in my veins. There was only one person who fit that description, and the idea of a Nightlord sinking her claws into her filled me with fearful rage. She couldn’t have… My head grew heavier with dark thoughts. She couldn’t have… Please no… She will die by the year’s end if… “I knew she would never grow healthy with her current parents.” Yoloxochitl chuckled to herself, as if remembering an amusing tale. Her eyes fluttered with mischief and childishness. “So…” She guided me to my bedchamber’s doors. I smelled blood in the air and heard the sound of suction. “I adopted her.” The doors snapped open. The faint smell of blood became overwhelming, along with a sickening taste of iron and copper in the air. The dim light of torches carried by guests illuminated the grim feast in all of its morbid horror. A red puddle spread upon the waiting lobby outside my chambers. Eztli had spilled her first drink. Namely, her own father. My thoughts were akin to balls shattering against a stone wall. My reborn heart stopped beating in my chest, stabbed not by a knife but by the bitter sting of horror and disgust. My eyes struggled to process the scene unfolding before them. Eztli was right there, standing before me with eyes as red as her bloodsoaked cotton dress. Her hands held her kneeling father to the ground while her fangs hungrily bit into his jugular. Guatemoc’s muffled moans of agony were drowned by his daughter’s greedy gulping. His skin was pale, his veins dried up. His eyes were devoid of light, and his twitching fingers grew weaker with each passing second. It didn’t deter Eztli. She greedily drank with a bestial, maddened hunger. She didn’t seem to notice me. She would suck Guatemoc down to the last drop of blood. The grim feast had an audience. Two red priests held Necahual prisoner and forced her to watch the spectacle. She struggled against the ropes restraining her hands in a panicked attempt to turn away. Tears of fear flowed down her cheeks and onto the cotton scarf that was keeping her mouth closed. I had dreamed of seeing her reduced to such a state in my darkest fantasies, but now it filled me with disgust. Tlacaelel… He was there too, rubbing his hands in a corner. Smiling. He was smiling, the dickless bastard. A couple of Nightkin chittered at his sides in their bestial state, their bat fangs salivating like dogs waiting for their turn. “So beautiful…” Yoloxochitl’s hands seized my shoulders, gently but firmly. “I’m moved…” I wasn’t moved. In fact, I was as still as a marble statue. The scene was such a gruesome display of absolute evil, so nauseating in its cruelty, that I simply stood there frozen in place. My head felt heavier than stone. My words died in my throat, drowned by the sound of Guatemoc’s blood ebbing away. His brownish cheeks turned ashen, and his daughter’s iron grip caused his empty veins to squeeze. I… I… What… What am I looking at? “Ah…” I panted in shock, unable to string two words together. “Ah…” Eztli, my dearest friend… Unlike her mother, she showed no horror at the crime she was committing. A maddened, bestial look of ecstatic delight showed on her bloodsoaked face. I couldn’t find the girl I’d loved so dearly in the abomination’s eyes. Only a bottomless hunger and an unquenchable bloodlust. This… had to be a nightmare. I was still in the Land of the Dead Suns, dreaming of darkness. “The first feast is always the most unsightly,” the Nightlord behind me said. “But look at how calm her father is… He’s giving his life so she might feed…” Yes… this was a nightmare. None of this was true. It was a dying hallucination, a feeble illusion on the afterlife’s threshold. It couldn’t be real… A warm liquid fell on my neck while Guatemoc turned limp and cold. The sensation snapped me out of my trance long enough to peek over my shoulder. Yoloxochitl was crying tears of blood. Tears of emotion. Tears of joy. “This is love, Iztac,” she said, oh so sweetly. Her blissful smile was the gentlest I had ever seen. “This is what true love looks like.” The most terrifying part was that she believed it. I could see it in her eyes. The feverish glint of insanity, the sincere gaze of a diseased mind who could interpret this… this horrific abomination as a laudable act. I finally realized what was wrong with Yoloxochitl. The Jaguar Woman was evil, the White Serpent was cruel, and the Bird of War was brutish. But the Flower of the Heart? The Flower was mad. Once Eztli had finished her meal, she released her grip on her lifeless father’s corpse. His empty husk slumped at his wife’s feet with a loud noise. Eztli licked the blood off her lips with a dark look of absolute bliss that soured my stomach. This… wasn’t a dream. This was reality. A nightmare, but still reality. “E-Eztli?” I found the strength to stammer. “Eztli?” Eztli did not respond. Her crimson eyes fluttered in a daze, lost in an expression of ultimate pleasure. Her muscles were relaxed, and her tongue stuck between her lips. Sharp fangs gleamed in the torches’ light. I wanted to hold her, to shake her out of it, but her terrifying expression made me recoil. She… Was Eztli even somewhere inside that creature? I… I… “Give her time to adjust,” Yoloxochitl said with a tone that could pass for kindness. “I swear to you, Iztac, I will raise her right this time.” My heart thrummed in fury, and an owl’s phantom talons materialized behind the Nightlord. I felt Yoloxochitl’s nails curl into my flesh. Her head snapped to the side, though I managed to dispel my spirit manifestation before she could catch a glimpse of it. It took everything to keep a blank face and not give myself away. My pulse quickened in panic. Tlacaelel frowned upon noticing the Nightlord’s worry. “Is something bothering you, mistress?” “I sensed an evil spirit,” she said with a frown, glancing at the shadows. “A scavenger trying to steal our food.” I would have stolen more than blood! I thought while trying to keep my wits. My Tonalli had reacted on its own, echoing my fury and nearly giving my true nature away. I would have stolen your wicked soul! Yoloxochitl had done worse than killing Eztli. She had twisted her into a monster willing to murder her own father for a sip of blood! Death would be too good for the Nightlord, and it took all my will not to summon my Spiritual Manifestation to hasten it! But if Yoloxochitl could sense my Tonalli, then I couldn’t fumble an assassination attempt. I needed to bear this act of cruelty like all the others and wait until I could return it tenfold. And more than anything… I needed to save Eztli. From herself. And moreover, I hadn’t missed the brief flash of fear in the Nightlord’s eyes. For a brief second, she had felt vulnerable. She could be killed. I sensed Yoloxochitl’s hands on my shoulders relaxing. Though she could detect my animal spirit, she appeared unable to identify me as its source. “Take your new sister away,” she ordered one of the Nightkin. “She needs rest.” I watched helplessly as a vampire gently carried Eztli in his arms and out of the room. I didn’t have time to worry for her safety, for Yoloxochitl turned her attention to another prey. “If there is anything I cannot stand, Iztac, it is a neglectful mother.” Yoloxochitl sneered at Necahual with contempt. “This woman failed in her duties. Instead of welcoming you into her home, she instead chose to treat you poorly. She forfeited her rights as a mother, both to you and that girl.” Necahual wept in bitter despair and naked terror. I should have found a measure of happiness in her misery, now that she understood what it meant to be weak and helpless. But I did not. “As emperor and judge of the living, Iztac…” Yoloxochitl whispered into my ear. “How would you like her to die?” While the remaining Nightkin smelled Necahual like an appetizing meal, my eyes turned to Guatemoc’s empty husk lying on the ground. His final expression was forever trapped in a silent scream of fear. No one deserved to become a vampire’s dinner. No one. “Of old age,” I rasped. Although I hated that woman, I couldn’t stand by and do nothing. I couldn’t let Eztli lose her mother after what just happened. And Guatemoc, in spite of everything, took me into his home. I wouldn’t let his wife suffer the same fate he did. Necahual’s eyes turned in my direction, pleading for mercy where her gagged mouth would not. As for Yoloxochitl, she glanced at me with a puzzled look. “You would forgive her?” “Never,” I replied with a sneer. Pity did not equal forgiveness. “But knowing her daughter and I have ascended beyond her ken is punishment enough. Let her grow old and bitter, haunted by her failures beneath my notice.” In a way, that was almost true. This night would haunt her for the rest of her life. “You are kind, Iztac,” Yoloxochitl said with the tone a mother would use to scold her naïve child. “But every sinner requires cleansing.” Of course, she wouldn’t let me decide for myself. The best Necahual could hope for was a lighter punishment. “Then let her make up for her failures,” I said, trying to sound like my school’s teachers when they sentenced students to labor. “She has failed to raise me and Eztli, so she shall work the rest of her life to take care of war orphans.” Though, come to think of it, that sounded a bit too light a punishment… Yoloxochitl would demand something harsher, as did my grudge. “Every wound visited on them will be visited upon her in turn,” I proposed. “If one of her charges is stoned, she shall be stoned in turn.” “A wound for a wound… with a touch of irony.” Yoloxochitl appraised Necahual, who whimpered at the Nightlord’s gaze. “Tlacaelel, strip her.” The eunuch eagerly ripped off Necahual’s cotton blouse and exposed her nakedness. Her clothes fell to the ground, exposing her full breasts, strong hips, and slim legs. The mortified Necahual attempted to cover her intimate parts by crossing her legs, but Tlacaelel remorselessly forced them apart with a hand. Her sweat of fear glistened on her skin. Though twice my age, Necahual remained a beautiful woman; Eztli had inherited her looks from her. Mother and daughter looked too much alike. “This comforts me in my choice.” Yoloxochitl nodded to herself with a look of satisfaction. “I will have her sent to the border as a bed slave. She will atone for her failure to raise you as a child by bearing those of your soldiers.” I thought I’d misheard for a moment, though Necahual’s muffled cry confirmed I hadn’t. The Nightkin whimpered in disappointment, while Tlacaelel suppressed a chuckle. He would die for this. I didn’t know how yet, but I would kill him. “I do not understand,” I lied. I prayed to the gods below to bring the Nightlord to her senses, but true deities ignored pleas as much as the false ones. “A wound for a wound.” Yoloxochitl’s scowl turned into an ugly smile. “She failed to be a mother to the emperor, so she will bear the sons of the empire. Our brave soldiers deserve to leave something behind in this world before they leave it, don’t you think? She will serve them until her womb becomes barren.” “This is…” Disgusting? Cruel? Sickening? I struggled against the urge to vomit. “Unlikely.” “Oh, she will fulfill her duties,” the Nightlord replied with a reassuring tone. “If she fails to conceive before the year’s end, I will have her flayed and given to our lesser kin. She will feed either her own children or mine.” Every time I thought a Nightlord couldn’t sink deeper into cruelty, they proved me wrong. At this point, I wised up to the fact that reasoning with this madwoman was a lost cause. An insidious disease sickened her mind. I could tell from Necahual’s weeping eyes that the prospect of being raped for the rest of her life didn’t appeal to her. But what else could I do? Yoloxochitl wanted her to suffer and wouldn’t settle for anything less than pure cruelty. What other punishment could I suggest? My eyes turned to that bastard Tlacaelel, whose words echoed in my mind. “If you wish for any woman to join your harem on a more permanent basis—even another’s wife or a virgin—you only need to ask.” “I refuse.” The words flowed out of my mouth on their own. I immediately felt Yoloxochitl’s hands tense up on my shoulders. She was displeased. I thought on my feet and improvised. “You have a wonderful idea, Lady Yoloxochitl,” I lied through my teeth. “But if you will forgive my selfishness… I want this woman for myself.” Yoloxochitl frowned at me, her crimson eyes squinting. “For yourself?” “Tlacaelel said my predecessor’s harem was in need of fresh blood. That I could have anyone I wanted, even married women.” I pointed a finger at Necahual, channeling all the resentment I held for her in my voice. “I want that slave. I want her all for myself.” Thankfully, the look of utter disgust Necahual sent me only pleased Yoloxochitl further. “Yes, I see,” the Nightlord whispered, her grip on me relaxing. “Yes, since she failed to raise you as a son, then she will bear yours. This will be a fair punishment.” I would rather bed a rat than Necahual, and I wouldn’t touch her with a ten-foot pole, but Yoloxochitl didn’t have to know that. “I assent to your request, Iztac,” Yoloxochitl said with a sharp nod. “She will join the imperial harem as a slave and servant.” I kept my mouth shut rather than let that madwoman misinterpret my pleas and come up with a worse alternative. I had spared Necahual death and a worse fate. I knew this was the best concession I would get tonight. “Are you happy with my gifts, my dear child?” Yoloxochitl asked me. “Have I not been good to you?” I locked eyes with her for a moment, my face a blank board. The Nightlord’s eyes were sincere. She truly believed she had done me a favor and that I should thank her for her “gifts”—Guatemoc, dead on the ground at his own daughter’s hands; Eztli, twisted into a monster too lost in her bloodlust to acknowledge the aforementioned atrocity; and a weeping widow she expected me to rape for my pleasure. “One day,” I said, choosing my words carefully, “I will repay your kindness as it should be.” “You are too kind.” Yoloxochitl nodded happily, unaware of my words’ true meaning. “I am looking forward to it.” I knew which Nightlord I would drag into the sun first. I could not find sleep that night. The Nightlord vanished with her kin, promising to return when I would need it most—a night that couldn’t come any slower. Tlacaelel had priests take Necahual away and servants drag Guatemoc’s corpse out of the palace. “We shall have his remains fed to your pets in the menagerie,” said the eunuch, “He will trouble you no⁠—” “I want him buried,” I said sharply, my voice brimming with disdain. I couldn’t stand Tlacaelel’s presence anymore. Not after seeing him smile. “He was a warrior once. Give him a worthy sepulture.” “As you wish, my emperor.” Tlacaelel smirked. “I hope tonight showed you what the Nightlords’ favor entails.” “Did you enjoy it, Tlacaelel?” I already knew the answer, but I wanted to hear it for myself. “The blood? The suffering? Did you enjoy it?” “My emperor, there is no greater joy to be found than in fulfilling one’s duty.” The eunuch chuckled to himself. “I hope one day you will find the same relief in your heart.” He would be the first to die. The stone that would sharpen my talons. Tlacaelel sensed my silent wrath and changed the subject. “We intended to introduce you to your consorts earlier today, but your accident delayed the ceremony. Now that you are awake, perhaps we can complete it? All those fine women are so eager to serve you, my emperor.” I wondered how many Necahuals would be among my consorts—women forced into servitude the same way I’d been. “I need a moment to meditate on tonight’s events,” I replied. Too much happened for me to waste time on cordialities. “I must retire inside the reliquary for a while.” “Of course, my emperor, take your time,” Tlacaelel said with a false smile. “I pray you will not have another accident, though. Lady Yoloxochitl’s sisters do not share her patience.” “I have learned my lesson,” I said coldly. “Tonight’s events won’t happen again.” One way or another. I retired into the imperial reliquary under heavy escort, though the soldiers did not follow me inside. I presumed they would not enter unless I tried killing myself again. I saw no trace of the blood I shed on its cold obsidian floor. My predecessors’ skulls awaited me in silent sorrow. I couldn’t hold it any longer. “Ah!” I collapsed to my knees and hit the ground with my fists so hard that it hurt. “Argh!” I bit my tongue so as not to alert the guards outside. I didn’t want them to see me like this, kneeling on the floor, holding back tears of anger and sorrow. Yoloxochitl, Tlacaelel, the First Emperor, and all his foul brood! Curse them all! Every last one of them! “Damn it!” I punched the ground with my fist, something warm flowing down my cheek. “Damn it, damn it, damn it… Eztli… I’m so sorry…” My forehead slammed against the cold floor, my hands tight as stones. Eztli… Eztli was dead, twisted, and reborn as a monster. One I was expected to marry in a few hours. Guatemoc was dead, and Necahual might follow if the Nightlord ever suspected my trick. I lived in a house of madness! “Ah… Ah…” I breathed slowly, inhaling and exhaling in the darkness. I tried to clear my head the best I could, to cling to hope. “I will destroy them for this… I will destroy them all. I swear to the true gods.” My curses did not go unanswered. Ghostly lights lit up the shadows like candles. “Can you hear us, our successor?” the skulls whispered. I wiped away the tears on my cheeks and knelt before my predecessors. My accomplices in revenge. “Yes,” I whispered back. My head peeked over my shoulder and at the reliquary’s entrance. I could see the guards’ shadows by the threshold. “Can they?” “They see and hear only what we choose to show them. Our power is limited, but this room shall forever remain our sanctuary.” The Parliament of Skulls let out a rueful chuckle. “The ritual connects us too. We shall see what you see and hear what you hear.” Good. Even in this prison, I still had a guardian spirit watching over me. I decided to summon another. I inhaled sharply and called upon my Tonalli. My body grew numb with an otherworldly chill. Talons stretched out of my shadow, followed by great wings. The owl-beast of my soul materialized feather by feather and filled the room with its towering shape. The more complete my Tonalli became, the more my mind slipped away. My vision shifted until I found myself staring at my own human body lost in a trance. My soul had fully escaped its vessel of flesh. It quickly tired me. As an owl larger than a trihorn, I was strong, big, and quick, yet my strength waned quickly. I tried to maintain my spiritual shape within the reliquary’s confines for the longest time possible. It ended up being short. My owl self faded away back into my shadow, and my human eyes snapped open. “One minute.” I gasped for air with lungs of flesh. “Not very far or long.” “Your Tonalli’s range and duration will increase with training,” my predecessors said. “But your body becomes helpless when you fully manifest it. This is both a strength and a weakness.” Indeed. I could potentially send my spirit to assassinate enemies from afar. However, it would make my true self vulnerable at the same time. Not to mention that fully manifesting it taxed my willpower. “You were lucky that Yoloxochitl is unskilled in the spiritual arts,” the Parliament of Skulls swiftly chastised me. “Had you summoned your Tonalli in the Jaguar Woman’s presence, you would have been discovered. You must be more careful from now on.” My hands tightened on my lap. “You don’t think I could have killed her on my own.” “No, we do not,” the Parliament answered bluntly. “Yoloxochitl is the weakest of the four, but she is still too powerful for you. You must strengthen your magic before you can even think of confronting her in an open battle.” “Then let us begin now.” My time among the living would be short, and I would not delay. I would have no more nights like this one. “What must I do? What flame is powerful enough to burn a Nightlord to cinders?” “The soul is made of three things,” the Parliament of Skulls began. “The Tonalli, the mind and spirit; the Teyolia, the life-fire of the heart; the Ihiyotl, the breath and the will. You must master all three to become a true sorcerer. Do you remember the faded sun?” Yes, I did. The Underworld’s purple sun was a pale shadow of the one that burned in the land of the living, yet it did provide light. Could I make it mine? “The four deities that became suns before your own offered their Teyolia to kindle the sky,” The Parliament’s lights flickered in the dark as they reminisced. “Their life-fire might have faded away, but embers of power remain. If you gather these remaining flames and infuse your own Teyolia with them⁠—” “I will gain the sun’s power,” I guessed, my fingers trembling with meager hope. “A fraction of it,” the Parliament clarified. “Your heart will become a pyre that shall burn even the gods. It will not guarantee victory, but it shall give you a chance.” My hand moved to my naked chest. My heart thrummed underneath the Nightlords’ mark, demanding revenge. “I will shoulder any obstacle, oh honored spirits,” I said with determination. “But I only saw one sun in the Underworld, that of the goddess Chalchiuhtlicue. Where are the other three?” “You must travel downward to find them,” the Parliament replied. “The Land of the Dead Suns is made of four layers, each a world’s corpse and a sun’s tomb. The strata you visited, the Catacombs of Sorrow, is naught but the first step in a dangerous journey. There are dead things down in the levels below that the gods locked away for a reason. Lost monsters and forgotten ideas that are anathema to life itself. Your nights will be long and full of dread.” “The days already are,” I replied dryly. Whatever terrors awaited in the Underworld, they couldn’t be worse than watching Eztli murder her own father. “Show me the road and I will walk it.” “First, you must claim Chalchiuhtlicue’s fire,” the Parliament declared. “You must travel to the dead kingdom of Mictlan in the first layer, where you will find both her sun’s embers and the gate leading you to the next level. We can discuss how to reach them when you next sleep. The waking world will demand other skills.” Somehow, I had the suspicion that waking hours would be harder on me. My quest in the Underworld sounded simple: to descend into its depths, collect four suns’ embers, and learn magic along the way. My time as an emperor, however, would be spent with the Nightlords watching over my neck. “What must I do after tonight’s slight?” I asked my predecessors. Merely thinking about Eztli’s fate boiled the blood in my veins. “How must I answer it?” “With patience,” the Parliament of Skulls replied calmly. “Submit to the Nightlords in words, pretend helplessness, and keep your true intentions a secret.” My jaw clenched in frustration. “I must let them stone me and murder innocents, and then thank them for the privilege?” “Would you rather play the fool or be one?” The Parliament let out a rattle of displeasure. “You must be like the silent snake, who slithers in the grass to better catch its prey unaware. Let the Nightlords believe that their cruelty crushed your spirit and that the pleasures they offered dulled your edges. Entertain them when they watch you, and gather allies when they do not.” “What of Necahual? I have no wish to…” The words died in my throat. “Touch her. I lied to Yoloxochitl so she would leave her alone, but if the Nightlord suspects the truth⁠—” “Then you should kill the one called Necahual.” My head snapped at my predecessors in shock. “What?!” “We’ve told you once before,” my predecessors reminded me. “The vampire’s kiss denies its victims their afterlife. When these leeches feed on blood, they also feast on the soul. This Guatemoc will only pass the Gate of Skulls when his killer is well and truly destroyed. His widow will suffer the same fate if the Nightlords grow weary of her. If she dies by your hand, at least she will pass on properly.” I refused to go through with it. I hadn’t saved Necahual from death at the hands of monsters just to do the deed myself. “There has to be a third way.” “Perhaps,” the Parliament conceded. “Given time, she might prove useful to our cause.” With Necahual now a long-term problem, my thoughts turned to Eztli. Poor Eztli, warped into a creature of the night. The Parliament’s words—that Guatemoc’s soul wouldn’t pass on until his own daughter perished—made me realize just how deep the curse went. It twisted people into monsters and denied their victims any hope for release. “Is there a cure for vampirism?” I asked my predecessors. “Can a Nightkin be made human again?” “If this is possible, we have yet to see it.” The Parliament noticed my disappointment and swiftly tried to lift my spirits. “The Land of the Dead Suns welcomes creatures who ruled long before the Nightlords. The vampires’ true origin remains a secret even to us, but they might tell you more. If you can find the poison’s source, perhaps you can clear the well.” It was a slim hope, but hope nonetheless. It gave me yet another reason to delve deeper into the land of the dead. But that would come later, in my sleep. “You said you would guide me in my waking hours,” I reminded the Parliament of Skulls. “I will soon be introduced to my consorts. What wisdom can you share with me on how to approach them, my predecessors?” “Four consorts were chosen to share your fate. They make natural allies. Many of us found friends and confidants among them.” The Parliament’s heads grunted in anger. “We also suffered cruel betrayals, for the hearts of humans are easily led astray. Test them all, trust no one.” “Why would they betray me?” I asked in confusion. I’d already considered approaching the consorts as friends today, but I did not expect my predecessors’ wariness. “What would they have to gain? We’re all going to die on the altar.” “The Nightlords will tell your consorts that they might be spared if they do their bidding,” the previous emperors replied. “These will be lies—no one escapes the knife—but the desperate will cling to any hope. Some of your consorts might even believe their sacrifice will be for the good of all and that a rebellion endangers the universe. Or the Nightlords will threaten their kin. There are many ways for the powerful to cow the weak into obedience.” I could believe that. I had seen far too many examples, from old priests bending boys at school to false prophets of the night leading an empire to believe in their lies. “What bothers us most is Yoloxochitl’s choice,” the Parliament said. “Never before has a vampire been chosen for the sacrifice. The Nightlords’ ritual is a delicate affair. This whim may have severe consequences down the line.” “A whim,” I muttered with a scowl. “All this blood… It was just a whim from her?” The Parliament remained silent for a moment before offering comforting words. “We mourn your loss with you,” the skulls whispered. “We too have lost many companions to the curse. All we advise you to do for now is to listen. Your friend may have become a mockery of life, but part of her still remains within her.” I changed the subject. I didn’t want to think of Eztli. The wound was too raw. “How may I become powerful?” I asked. “How can I make others behave on my behalf?” “The emperor does wield powers of his own,” my predecessors replied. “Not all of them are borrowed. There are loopholes to exploit, duties that can become rights, and rules that can give you authority. First, we shall also teach you to consult with the Yaotzin, the wind of chaos, so that you may learn the secrets of friends and foes.” The Yaotzin? “I’ve never heard of this name.” “Where do curses go when they’re uttered?” the Parliament asked, though it did not wait for my answer. “Words carry power, Iztac Ce Ehecatl; they are the source of Ihiyotl magic. As small currents fuel great rivers, a thousand curses form deadly hurricanes. This is the Yaotzin. A wind born of malign words, the enemy of both sides.” My eyes widened in surprise as I made the obvious connection. “The voices in the winds…” “Indeed.” The Parliament’s hundreds of faces let out a shared grunt. “As Nahualli, you can hear the Yaotzin’s whispers. Trust it not, for this wind exists to spread discord; but properly coaxed, it will answer questions.” “Questions about what?” “Of evil words, of shameful secrets, and of secret betrayals. The Yaotzin knows every sin that has ever been uttered. The Nightlords know how to guard their secrets against it, but mortals do not. They confess their crimes and their guilt to the wind when they think of themselves alone, unaware that when they allow a word to escape their lips, it is free to torment them.” “We shall carry thy words to those who will listen,” the winds told me when I first rebelled against the Nightlords. I suddenly wondered who it might be. “We shall teach you the spell of Augury, which will allow you to consult the Yaotzin. This shall be your first step in mastering Ihiyotl magic.” The Parliament’s eyes lit up as they bestowed their knowledge. “To form a covenant with it, you must offer a drop of blood to the wind to catch its attention. Then you must offer a tribute, a truth that will harm someone if revealed. Do not confess anything that can be turned against you. The Yaotzin knows nothing of loyalty and might one day inform your enemies. Each truth you give away must be different from the last.” I remembered Xolotl’s words—that magic was all about giving and receiving in return. I’d sworn I wouldn’t listen to the voices in the wind for the rest of my life, but I guessed stabbing my own heart and dying voided the vow. “And then?” “Then you must ask a question. The crueler the information you reveal, the more the wind will whisper back. The Yaotzin never lies, for the truth cuts deeper than any knife.” “Then I will interrogate the wind on the consorts once I have learned their names.” I bowed before the previous emperors. “I thank thee for your guidance.” “We wish we could offer more than that, our successor.” The Parliament’s glowing eyes dimmed in the shadows. “We shall meet again in the Land of the Dead Suns to plot our revenge.” The spirits returned to their silent grave, and I emerged from the reliquary alone with my thoughts. The wind blew upon my face when I walked upon the roof and whispered poison into my ear. “Do not trust the skulls,” the Yaotzin said. “They keep secrets from you.” I froze for a second, meditated on this information, and then carried on as if nothing had happened. It was indeed the enemy of both sides. With my meditation complete, maids and servants prepared me for the ceremony. They led me into hot baths to wash me, dressed me in imperial robes, and crowned me with the emperor’s headdress. I neither resisted nor said a word. The Nightlords wanted to see me cowed, and I would indulge their delusions. “It is time for you to sit on your throne, oh Great Emperor,” Tlacaelel said once servants finished dressing me. “Many will come to pay you homage today, including foreign dignitaries.” “I suppose I must welcome them with politeness, Tlacaelel?” I asked calmly. “If that is your wish.” As I suspected, the eunuch appeared pleased that I would consult him for advice. He believed me neutered. “Everyone within the empire’s borders and beyond owes you obedience, oh Great Emperor.” I wondered how many resented that fact… and whether we could find common ground. An escort of guards guided me into a vast pavilion within the palace’s heart. I was immediately struck by the hall’s sheer size. Half my village could have fit within its confines. Great marble columns supported a vaulted ceiling tall enough to let a longneck through; precious gemstones on its surface mimicked the night sky. Delicate tapestries adorned the walls alongside a host of trophies taken from a thousand defeated tribes: colorful feathers, the skulls of great creatures, magnificent pottery, and dazzling golden statuettes stood on hardwood shelves to impress visitors. Rugs covered every inch of the marble floor. A masterfully crafted throne of obsidian oversaw the entire room from its end atop an elevated platform. Plush and cushions sat around it, albeit on a level below it; I assumed they were meant for dignitaries and advisors. Rare plants and burning resin filled the hall with intoxicating fragrances. None of these distractions could obscure the room’s most impressive detail—an obsidian window laced with streaks of red oversaw the throne from behind. Its carvings made it resemble a deity’s ghastly eye. I assumed it represented the First Emperor, whose dimmed sunlight filtered through the blackened glass. A reminder that the Nightlords would always look over my shoulder, no matter how high I ascended. “Impressive, is it not?” Tlacaelel and the guards formed two lines on each side of the stairway leading to the throne. “It is time for you to take your rightful place at the apex of the world, oh Great Emperor.” I ascended the steps with as much enthusiasm as a condemned man walking toward the sacrificial altar. The throne proved no more comfortable than its fearsome appearance suggested; the absence of cushions did nothing to blunt the obsidian’s coldness. The armrests’ edges were sharper than blades, preventing me from resting my hands. The one comfort I could find was the height—I towered over Tlacaelel and his ilk from over ten feet above. I guessed the underlying message behind that design choice—that no matter how insignificant my fellow mortals were before an emperor’s majesty, I would never rest easy. Once I sat properly, courtiers in dazzling clothes and feathered dresses swarmed the room from nowhere. They advanced with their heads down, avoiding my gaze like the crawling maggots they were. Tlacaelel announced my glory to all who would listen. “All kneel before the Great Emperor of Yohuachanca, the Godspeaker, Servant of the Long Night and the first king of the Thirteenth Cycle, the Huey Tlatoani, and Conqueror of the Earth!” Guards hit shields of wood with their spears when Tlacaelel spoke, as they did for my predecessor. “Iztac, the First of His Name, and his four consorts!” I braced myself for the blow I knew would come. Yoloxochitl had warned me whom I should expect to see today. Enormous doors of hardwood opened, and four women entered the hall. The last consorts I saw had been shaved, drugged, stripped, and shipped to the sacrificial altar. The ladies that walked into the throne room were no vampire appetizers. They came dressed in splendid clothes and unique jewelry that showcased their differences. And most importantly, they looked at me rather than keeping their heads down as protocol demanded. I appraised each of my fellow sacrifices in turn, trying to discern whether they would make for friends or foes. A mere glance told me much. The first consort was a young woman my age, with the palest skin I had ever seen—not a light shade of brown like mine, but pinkish-white. Her hair was like a fountain of gold falling on her shoulders, and her eyes gleamed with a vivid shade of green. I’d never seen anything like her before, even among foreigners peddling their wares in the capital’s markets. Her fair face, with its high cheekbones and slightly upturned nose, differed from the common features of Yohuachanca’s people. She strode forward with confidence that bordered on insolence, her vibrantly colored embroidered tunic left her slim legs exposed. She wore a treasury’s worth of golden armbands, necklaces, and earrings. Of the four, she looked the most like a princess; and when our eyes met, she gave me a lovely smile and a playful gaze. The second consort couldn’t be more different. She was a head taller than me, and a decade older too. Her dark-brown skin, amber eyes, and fiery mane of red hair marked her as an Amazoness from the southern jungles. She was more muscular than most warriors and dressed as one; she wore thick, padded cotton armor instead of a shirt, a functional loincloth, and a simple circle of shells and claws instead of a headdress. Her callused hands instinctively brushed against her belt, searching for a dagger or a sword that was no longer there. She walked with regal dignity, but I could see the resignation in her fierce eyes. She hated being there as much as I did. Probably a war captive taken in battle. The third consort gave me pause, for I saw my own reflection. She was a petite thing around my age, slim and frail. The earthy tones of her garments made her appear almost invisible in the pillars’ shadows. Her traits were common, her hands trembling with shyness. There was nothing particular about this young woman except for her long white hair and pale blue eyes. The same as mine. A Nahualli. The girl blushed when I met her gaze and shyly lowered her head. The golden-haired consort’s smile faded at the sight, her emerald eyes flaring with a dangerous glint. And my fourth wife… My hands clenched in anger on my armrests, the sharp edges cutting thin lines into my palms and letting drops of blood drip onto the obsidian. I knew it was coming, and it still unsettled me. Outwardly, she hadn’t changed much. Her skin complexion was a little lighter than before, and her amber eyes were slightly more vibrant, but if anything, she looked healthier and more beautiful than ever. She had traded her bloodsoaked cotton blouse for a blue priestess dress and skirt that left most of her cleavage and legs exposed. Gold armbands protected her forearms and ankles, and a half-moon shaped headdress glittered atop her long black hair. Her naked feet made no sound when she walked. However, I had lived with her for years. I knew her inside and out. Her smile was a little more devious than normal. She moved with predatory confidence she had never shown in the past. And the golden goblet she carried in her hand spilled a drop of fresh blood on the floor. I now guessed the purpose behind the obsidian windows. They did more than let sunlight in; they filtered out whatever holy power repelled the Nightlords and their kin. My palace was safe for them to invade. The dawn would not burn them within these unhallowed halls. The other consorts glanced warily at their undead sister, and she alone dared to speak up. “What’s wrong, Iztac?” The Nightkin, who had once been Eztli, flashed a devious smile. Her fangs reflected in the filtered light. “Don’t you like my new look?” Eztli was back in my life, yet so far gone. part0009. 4WED TO DEATH Ireceived gifts all morning with three strangers and an undead friend watching me over my shoulder. My coronation had been a bloody affair witnessed by the entire empire. The homecoming ceremony was more lively, with drummers, flutists, and ocarina players playing a delightful melody in the background. A motley assembly gathered in the throne room to swear oaths of fealty and offer gifts. I counted hundreds of them, hailing from all four corners of Yohuachanca and beyond. Representatives from old imperial cities and assimilated tribes varied from regal nobles covered head-to-toe in vibrant feathers and jewels to tribal chiefs clad in jaguar pelts and cotton armor. The warriors among them wore warpaint and tattoos, though they weren’t allowed to carry weapons in “my” halls. These people were the imperial elite, who had known nothing other than the Nightlords’ yoke. Newly assimilated tribes followed them in the procession. Tawny chiefs from the northern borderlands, with headdresses of white feathers and embroidered clothes; men and women whose seashell adornments marked them as princes and princesses from the Boiling Sea’s disparate islands; and red-haired Amazons from the green jungles to the south, wearing little more than pelts and warpaints. The latter group gave dark, pained looks of utter humiliation to their fellow among my consorts. I shared a little of their sorrow. These were defeated people, conquered tribes whose members fueled the Nightlords’ altars by the thousands a few nights ago. We shared a common kinship. The last group, the foreign diplomats, was the smallest. Few civilizations survived their first contact with Yohuachanca, and fewer retained their independence afterward. I counted only two delegations—envoys from the Sapa Empire in the southwest and the distant Three-Rivers Federation in the far north. I recognized the former from their llama wool mantles and the sheer weight of gold they carried on their person; the latter wore bison-leather mantles, animal bones, and gray wolf pelts. Their gazes were cautious, even slightly defiant. They alone had survived Yohuachanca’s conquests… for now. Both the Sapa and the Three-Rivers had only been saved from conquest by their strength and distance from Yohuachanca’s heartland. In time, though, the empire would attack them after conquering the tribes, acting as buffer states between the realms. Everyone knew it. I wondered if we could find common ground against the Nightlords… and how many of them understood that I was nothing but a puppet. I could already imagine Tlacaelel’s answer: “You are not a puppet, oh Great Emperor, but the Godspeaker whom all mortals fear.” That was true, at least. The Nightlords never met with “worldly rulers” directly; their so-called divine dignity made anyone lesser than the emperor unworthy of their presence. As far as the world was concerned, I spoke with their voice and listened with their ears. One by one, the visitors approached in turn to lay gifts at my feet. Imperial representatives went first. Huitzilampa, a city famous for its flowers, gave away a basket of lush and splendid rare flowers for the gardens. Tonalco’s mines offered chests overflowing with goldwork and a shining mask in my predecessor’s image. Quetzaltenango delivered a finely crafted, leather-bound codex and maps of the empire, which pleased me more than any gold; I might not be able to escape this palace’s walls, but at least I could read about the world beyond them. More gifts followed, each more splendid than the last—handwoven tapestries depicting Yohuachanca’s history, collections of precious ivory horns, ceremonial cups adorned with gemstones, jade sculptures, a collection of bronze bells… One of the noble visitors even presented me their newborn son, asking that I name them myself. I chose “Guatemoc” and thanked him for the honor. I had never seen so much wealth in my life, and yet I found myself struggling against disinterest by the twentieth offering and vow of fealty. It was hard for me to focus with Eztli standing at my side, so close that I could sense her gaze on my shoulder. I only emerged from my reverie when the newly federated northern tribes presented their own gift—a baby, birdlike animal no taller than a large ocelot. Its body, covered in a soft layer of fluffy brown feathers, possessed minuscule forearms, sturdy, disproportionate legs, and a tapered tail. Inquisitive round eyes looked at me above a muzzled, elongated snout and a maw full of fangs. The creature fluttered in excitement, struggling against the rope with which its captors kept it tightly bound. The beast’s sharp claws scratched the leash. I shifted in my seat in excitement as I recognized the animal. In spite of its small size, I could see the shadow of the terror it would eventually grow into. “Is that a baby feathered tyrant?” I muttered. “Indeed, my lord,” a melodious voice answered on my right. My golden-haired consort leaned in to better whisper into my ears. “I’ve been told that this specimen is two years old.” My consorts weren’t allowed to sit for this ceremony. Instead, they stood next to my throne and whispered in my ear. Before we began, Tlacaelel told me their names—the golden-haired girl with the singing voice was Ingrid; her foreign name sounded unlike anything I’d ever heard. The Amazon went by the name of Chikal, and my fellow Nahualli by Nenetl. And then, of course, there was Eztli. “What name will you give him, Iztac?” she whispered in my left ear. Her voice sounded so familiar, so coy, so friendly, yet I couldn’t hear her breath. “May I suggest Xolotl?” My head snapped in her direction in shock, much to her amusement. Her smile was so much like Eztli’s, so full of life. Only, instead of warmth, her red eyes put ice in my veins. “Why that reaction?” she asked me with a chuckle. “You don’t like it?” Does she know? I tried to keep a blank face. I suddenly realized my mistake. No, it’s just a joke. Don’t give anything away. “Xolotl, the guide of the dead?” Nenetl chewed her lip anxiously. She stood on my left too, but as far from Eztli as protocol would allow. “Is it not… dreadful?” “Will he not send men to the Underworld when he is grown?” Eztli replied mirthfully. “Should we not honor the gods this way?” Chikal the Amazon clenched her jaw at her fellow consort’s words but said nothing. I seized on the opportunity to know her better and turned my head away from Eztli. “What would you suggest?” Chikal considered her words a few seconds before answering. From that alone, I could tell she was more thoughtful than the others. “This creature is untested in battle, Lord Emperor,” she replied with a deep, bellowing voice and a guarded tone. “I would suggest a humbler name.” “Why not name him after your father, my lord?” Ingrid suggested with a warm smile. “You would honor your family.” What a good suggestion. I nodded sharply and turned my attention toward the dignitaries. “I accept this gift with warmth,” I said, trying to sound regal as best I could. I had absolutely no idea what was proper in this environment, and I didn’t care too much. “I shall name it Itzili, after my father.” The dignitaries bowed and took my feathered tyrant away to the menagerie. It saddened me a little. These animals usually took a decade to grow to full size, and I was unlikely to live that long. Representatives from the Boiling Islands followed soon after, offering me chests full of chili peppers, spices, and polished conch shells. “They offer a fine tribute,” Ingrid murmured with a small frown. “But my Lord Emperor should demand more to show strength. The islanders did not submit easily.” Nenetl showed them more empathy. “Should we not forgive them?” she asked with gentle eyes full of compassion, though she spoke so low I struggled to hear her. “Their people have been decimated by the blood sacrifices… This may be all they can afford.” Chikal nodded in agreement. “To forgive them would show your wisdom, Lord Emperor.” I observed the islanders, who avoided my gaze in fear. They too had suffered a heavy toll at the Nightlords’ hands. I would not increase their burden. “I accept your gifts,” I said. And I hope you will remember this if I ever call on you. Could these people even become good allies? They looked beaten and defeated. But then again, I had to pretend to be the same. The Amazon tribes followed with their gifts; eight nubile red-haired girls wearing nothing except loincloths and tattoos. All were around my age, with fully formed breasts, strong muscles, fair faces, and sparkling eyes. Much to my shame, my cock erected a bit beneath my robes at the sight, though I managed to hide it by crossing my legs. Damn it, I wasn’t used to seeing so many women half-naked… “Oh Great Emperor, we offer you the daughters of the south as wives,” a red-haired crone said, her voice cracking a bit. “One princess of each tribe.” The eight women avoided my gaze, like everyone else, but they couldn’t hide their shaking fists, their trembling fingers, or their clenched jaws. They didn’t want to be here. No more than I did. Instead of answering immediately, I gestured to Chikal, inviting her to approach. “What is the meaning of this?” I asked her, so low that only the other consorts could hear. Chikal’s lips strained slightly. “To offer a woman to a male is a tribe’s greatest gift,” she declared diplomatically. “For it means the daughters born of the union will strengthen the tribe as a whole.” I didn’t need years of political training to read between the lines—these tribes had been crushed and had surrendered unconditionally. To have their princesses shipped as wives to their conqueror was a complete and utter humiliation. I considered how to answer before realizing this could be a wonderful opportunity to gather allies… or at least buy some goodwill. “I appreciate the gifts,” I told the Amazons loud enough for the entire throne room to hear. I then waved a hand at my consorts. “But as you can see, I have enough wives already.” Tlacaelel, who stood in a corner, smiled cruelly. “Do you reject the gift, oh Great Godspeaker?” The Amazon ambassadors froze, as did Chikal. No doubt they expected punishment on my part. I decided to disappoint them all. “I will keep these daughters of the jungle, but not as wives.” Would they respond well to flattery? It didn’t cost me anything to try… “Amazons are famed for their skills at warfare, so they shall join my family’s personal guard. They shall protect my consorts from harm.” One of the eight was so shocked that her head snapped in my direction, before swiftly lowering it upon recognizing her mistake. Chikal glanced at me with a puzzled look before offering a sharp, thankful nod. She appreciated the gesture. Tlacaelel squinted at me but kept his mouth shut. Did that bastard already suspect me of trying to gather allies? I had to somehow eliminate him in a way that couldn’t be traced back to me. A talon to the throat would fill me with satisfaction, but it would give my Tonalli away. Should I use poison, maybe? I did glean a few tips from watching Necahual work with herbs… An idea hit me like a lightning bolt. Would she agree to help? Necahual hated me, but she probably hated the Nightlords’ servants even more now. Or, at least, I would in her situation. The possibility that she might betray me remained. I need leverage. But that could wait. The foreign dignitaries followed with their own gifts. The Three-Rivers’ lead ambassador bowed before me, his shell jewelry reflecting the light of the torches. His assistants unveiled exquisitely crafted pottery filled to the brim with colorful feathers. “Feathers hold great importance among the Three-Rivers tribes, my lord,” Ingrid whispered to me. “The blue ones symbolize friendship, and the green ones wealth.” “So they offer a fruitful friendship?” I asked, the nuances lost on me. Ingrid smiled warmly. “My lord is wise.” I had heard enough of Tlacaelel’s flattery to recognize unearned praise. Of the four consorts, she was the one most eager to get into my good graces. It made me distrust her a bit, though I did not show it. I accepted the gift, though I promised nothing in return; I knew all too well that the Nightlords might demand these people’s submission in the near future. The Sapa representatives followed soon afterward and contrasted starkly with the other delegation; whereas the Three-Rivers showed humility in their garments, the Sapa ambassadors reveled in their ostentatious gold jewelry. Perhaps they intended to show their wealth. If so, they succeeded. Their gift was the most impressive of them all. I watched on, mesmerized, as half a dozen slaves dragged a massive stone tablet through the throne room. Over ten feet in height and half as wide, the artifact appeared as ancient as it was beautiful. Carved from black volcanic stone common in the south, its metal-plated surface represented a familiar view of the night sky. Silver stars and constellations were etched around an obsidian stone circled with gold at the center, which represented an eclipsed sun. “The Lords of the Sapa wish to offer you this Chaskarumi, oh Great Yohuachancan Emperor,” the Sapa ambassador said in our language. “Our masters use these star tablets to predict the motion of constellations.” I did not answer. There was something… strange about this tablet. Something magical. The way the silver stars glimmered in the hall’s filtered light, the way the constellations’ patterns shifted slightly depending on the angle at which I looked at them… I could feel my Tonalli waking in the depths of my soul. My slumbering magic reacted to this tablet somehow. Tlacaelel noticed my fascination. “Are you trying to curse our emperor with foreign magic?” he asked the ambassadors with a smile that wasn’t one. “How brazen of you.” The Sapa ambassador smirked ruefully. “I am sure no earthbound magic could affect your gods’ true prophet.” The reply appeared polite, almost tactful, but I immediately picked up on an important detail—the ambassador didn’t say “the gods” but “your gods.” The Sapa did not worship the Nightlords. Ingrid eagerly leaned in closer to me to offer advice. “You should accept the gift, my lord,” she said. “Show you are above such trivialities. Disinterest is the greatest insult. By lowering yourself to their level, you weaken your authority.” I thanked her with a sharp nod, though she clearly missed the supernatural subtleties of this gift. This tablet did have power. I could feel it in my bones. Was it cursed, as Tlacaelel said, or blessed? Whatever the case, anything that annoyed the eunuch brought me joy. “You are correct, ambassador,” I said. “No foreign magic will affect me. Nonetheless, your gift is appreciated.” “We hope it will inaugurate a long-lasting friendship between our people.” The ambassador bowed graciously. “One that will mutually benefit our realms.” I hoped so too. If I couldn’t find allies inside the empire, I would have to look for them outside our borders. By the time the ceremony concluded, the day was already half-spent. The priests dismissed the various representatives without giving me a chance to talk with them in private. I quickly realized little could happen in the palace without oversight. “Oh Divine Emperor, our cooks have prepared a wonderful midday meal for you and your consorts,” Tlacaelel said. “A roasted young longneck on a bed of potatoes.” “Will you attend?” I asked him as I rose from my throne. I tried to hide my joy when he answered “no.” The less I saw this half-man, the better. “What am I to expect from the days going forward?” As it turned out, emperors followed a pretty busy schedule—after dressing up at dawn and breakfast, I would immediately hold a morning council where my advisors and I were expected to oversee the empire’s day-to-day affairs, prepare military campaigns, launch construction projects… In short, do the Nightlords’ work for them. Then I would hold an audience to receive petitions, collect tributes, and judge cases. After a midday meal, most of the afternoon was free for me to enjoy as I wished, though I was expected to occasionally show my face at festivals, ball games, or oversee army drills. “The day will conclude with nightfall religious rituals, where you must offer gifts to the Nightlords and purify the empire’s sins.” Tlacaelel smiled ear to ear. “This is of paramount importance to maintain your connection to the gods and their divine favor.” I would have to report to my captors each night. I tried to hide my joy at this wonderful prospect. Cold arms fell on my shoulder and sent a chill down my spine. “Don’t worry, Iztac,” Eztli whispered behind me. She leaned against my back until I felt her chin brushing against my neck. “I will be there to protect you.” I slowly glanced over my shoulder and met her crimson eyes. Her face and smile were so gentle, so familiar, but her gaze… “What’s wrong?” Eztli’s gentle smile hid her fangs well. I noticed the other consorts watching the scene unfold at the periphery of my gaze, either too frightened or unsettled to intervene. “Do I look so good that you are left speechless?” I wondered if I should lie, but… I didn’t have the strength to. “I watched you drink your father to death,” I said flatly. Nenetl, who had been close enough to hear, put a hand on her mouth to hide her horror. Eztli blinked briefly, as if struggling to remember an unimportant detail. “Oh.” She nodded to herself. “That.” I detected not even the slightest hint of disgust. Only passing acknowledgment, and then nothing. “Do not worry, Iztac,” Eztli said with a giggle, as if sharing a joke. “He’s still inside me.” The Parliament’s warnings echoed in my mind—that the vampire kiss denied its victims an afterlife. I glanced at Eztli’s stomach, my heart skipping a beat as I imagined Guatemoc’s soul wiggling in her intestines. I… I didn’t know how to respond to that. Eztli waited for me to find my words and awkwardly let me go when I didn’t. I could tell my reaction bothered her as much as her words unsettled me. Servants guided us to a council room upstairs, close to my bedchambers. Much like the rest of the palace, the chamber was a study in opulence, with its polished marble floor covered in jaguar rugs, its cotton curtains, and massive obsidian windows offering a splendid view of the gardens outside. A large granite table stood in its center with five matching wood chairs. A tremendous feast of food and drink awaited us—fresh avocados as appetizers, spicy salsa and tomatoes, maize soup, potatoes, and of course, the roasted baby longneck Tlacaelel so eagerly promised. The animal sat atop the table with its insides filled with vegetables. Servants swiftly began to cut it up and serve us beverages, including fruit juices and frothing chocolate drinks. Though this was more food than I had seen in my entire life, I focused more on my fellow eaters. Their reactions told me much. Ingrid quickly chose the chair next to mine, as if fearful someone else would steal it; Eztli sat on my other side, far from the obsidian window; Chikal moved next to Ingrid, her eyes observing me warily; and Nenetl, who had hesitated, found herself forced to take the last seat available. Ingrid was eager to please me. Eztli already possessed vampiric instincts. Chikal assessed me cautiously. And Nenetl was a wallflower. Who was my friend among them, and who was my foe? After a few seconds, I realized they were all waiting for me to begin the feast. I relieved the tension by grabbing a slice of the longneck. Ingrid chose the same plate I did, Chikal ate with regal restraint, and Nenetl stuck to the vegetables. Only Eztli did not touch a meal. She had already drunk her fill of blood earlier. “Ingrid,” I said. The golden-haired girl immediately appeared pleased that I paid attention to her first. “Forgive my curiosity, but I don’t think I’ve ever heard a name like yours.” “There is nothing to forgive, my lord,” Ingrid reassured me with a pleasant smile. I had to admit she looked quite lovely. “My mother comes from a distant land. She gave me the name Ingrid for it means ‘beloved’ in the Runetongue of her home.” The Runetongue? I had never heard of this language. “Did she come from the north?” “My mother hails from a cold land to the east,” Ingrid replied with a hint of pride. “Far beyond the Boiling Sea and the ocean beyond it.” That drew my full attention. I completely forgot about the delicious meat and my vow of caution. The tales of the world beyond the sea had always fascinated me. “What’s its name?” I asked. “What is it like?” Ingrid chuckled at my sudden interest. “My mother calls it the Winland, though I’ve never seen it,” she explained. I noticed that Nenetl was also listening rapturously, while Chikal and Eztli both appeared a little more wary. “It is a land of snowy meadows and sailors who ride ships of wood into the stormy sea.” “Interesting,” Eztli said, her lips playful. “How did your mother end up in Yohuachanca then? The Boiling Sea burns away most ships, does it not?” “It does.” Ingrid’s smile strained a bit. “Mother’s boat was shipwrecked. She and others were rescued by Emperor Moctezuma the Fifth, who fell in love with her and sired me.” “You’re…” Nenetl gulped slightly. “Sorry. Are you a princess?” “Indeed I am,” Ingrid replied proudly, though she quickly focused her attention back on me. “I’ve only ever known this palace. I know it like the back of my hand. Would you like me to show you around, my lord?” “It would please me,” I replied politely. I should question the Parliament of Skulls about Ingrid tonight; her father had to be among the ghosts. Chikal, who had listened in silence so far, set her drink aside. “Did your mother ever try to return to her homeland, Ingrid?” “Why would she?” Ingrid replied with a sly grin. “Yohuachanca is our home.” Did she truly mean it, or was she just saying these words for the sake of the servants serving us food? I briefly glanced at them, wondering how many reported what they heard to Tlacaelel. “What about you, Chikal?” I asked the Amazon. “Where do you come from?” Chikal set her beverage on the table with poise. “I once led the tribe known as Chilam in the southeast,” she explained. Only then did I realize she spoke with a near-perfect Yohuachancan accent except for her deep intonations; if I was blind, I could have mistaken her for a native. “We lived in a city deep in the jungle.” Chilam, Chilam… the name felt familiar, though it took me a while to remember it. “Chilam was conquered last year,” I muttered in remembrance. “Alongside its sister-city, Balam.” Chikal nodded sharply. “Your predecessor routed us in battle, but we fought well enough to earn the favor of the Nightlord Sugey. My tribe was spared the altars on the condition that I become your loyal consort and general, Lord Iztac.” So we shared a common plight. Still, one word bothered me. “My general?” “As Lady Sugey’s pick, I will advise you on military matters,” Chikal explained with a blank, unreadable face. “I will help organize campaigns, serve as your aide, and lead armies in the field if you ask it of me.” My jaw clenched in sympathy. The Nightlords would force her to enslave more tribes, as her own had been conquered. “I’m sorry to hear that.” Chikal shrugged. “Woe to the conquered,” she said. “I am not bitter about this arrangement. It shall secure my tribe’s survival.” She has accepted defeat. She fought, lost, and submitted. It upsets her to see her tribe brought low, but it’s still better than death. Was there still some fight left in her, buried under her resentment? What would it take to unearth it? “Is it true you Amazons do not have males?” Eztli asked. The fact that the mere sound of her voice unsettled the other consorts appeared lost on her. “Or is it a myth?” “We only use males for the purpose of reproduction,” Chikal replied. “All our children are born female, so we must find men from outside our tribes.” Eztli raised an eyebrow. “And how did you court them?” There was a dangerous edge to Chikal’s smile. “We defeated tribes in battle and captured their men.” On second thought, maybe I shouldn’t pity her tribe too much. I realized Chikal didn’t mind serving Yohuachanca because she would keep up with her kind’s practices, only on a much larger scale. Which left only one consort a mystery. Nenetl blushed when she felt my gaze on her. “I, uh…” She cleared her throat and fidgeted on her seat. “I am nothing special, my lord.” “That’s wrong,” Eztli said with a chuckle. She grabbed a strand of Nenetl’s white hair, causing her to squeal. “I’ve never seen someone with the same hair as Iztac.” “I…” Nenetl’s hands moved to her lap, and her eyes turned to face the ground rather than us. “I… I was born cursed, yes.” My blood boiled in my veins. “Don’t say that,” I snapped. My angry tone caused Nenetl’s back to stiffen. “That’s just stupid superstitions.” Nenetl opened her mouth to argue, but then swiftly closed it. “I’m…” She gulped. “I’m sorry, my lord.” “For what?” I questioned her, utterly puzzled. Did she… “Wait, do you actually believe such stupidity?” Her meek silence was an answer in itself. I stared at my fellow Nahualli, utterly speechless. It had never occurred to me that someone in my situation wouldn’t struggle back against the superstitions that bound us. But I should have known that if one repeated a lie often enough, it would become believable. I fought back the urge to shake Nenetl like a tree and bring her back to her senses. At least she seems nice. I felt the most sympathy for Nenetl as a fellow victim of popular superstitions. Ingrid was a transparent flatterer, though I wondered what she aimed to gain from cozying up to me. Chikal was experienced, maybe even dangerous. And Eztli… After the meal, Ingrid swiftly put a hand on my arm. “Will you let me show you around the palace this afternoon, my lord?” I blushed a bit. Her fingers were warm and smooth, and I was unused to a beautiful young woman showing interest in me, even the rather insincere kind. “I would appreciate it,” I said. Especially the gardens. “Perhaps you and Nenetl can show me around.” I didn’t miss the slight flash of displeasure in Ingrid’s eyes. Bringing a tag-along didn’t fill her with joy. “Me?” Nenetl asked in surprise. “I, uh… I don’t know much about the palace…” “Good, then you will benefit from it.” I turned toward Chikal. “Would you mind welcoming our new guards instead of joining us?” “Your will is my command, Lord Emperor,” Chikal replied politely. “I will pass on the visit, Iztac,” Eztli said with a smile, her body meshing with the shadows in the room. “The day is not my time. We’ll meet again at nightfall.” I wasn’t looking forward to it. I spent the afternoon on a pleasant stroll. Ingrid held my arm in her own as she guided me through the gargantuan palace and its even larger gardens while Nenetl shadowed us alongside a cadre of red-eyed guards. The latter often switched with others, but we couldn’t step into any room without half a dozen of them trailing us. Ingrid seemed as annoyed by their presence as I was, though she proved quite the gracious guide. “The garden’s flowers come from all corners of the empire,” she explained as we walked along stone pathways meandering through lush foliage and exotic plants. The silence around us contrasted neatly with the palace’s bustling activity. For a moment, I could convince myself that I had fled civilization to enter a primeval forest unknown to man. “Each part of the garden is carefully arranged to represent one of Yohuachanca’s provinces. See the flowers on your right?” I followed her advice and gazed upon a radiant array of light purple dahlias. Their fragrance almost covered the stench of blood radiating from the red-eyed guards trailing us. “These are called the emperor’s blooms,” Ingrid explained while squeezing my arm. “Emperor Moctezuma the First loved them so much that he put them on display everywhere in the palace, hence the name. Their tubes are used to transport water, and their petals can heal illnesses.” “I’m impressed by your knowledge,” I said sincerely. Ingrid knew the names of almost all the garden plants and the menagerie’s many beasts. I never knew large snakes from the jungle were called “boas” until she told me. “My lord flatters me.” Ingrid’s laugh was like falling water, clear and crystalline. “As Iztacoatl’s representative, I have been trained to advise you on matters of diplomacy, arts, and culture. With my advice, your name—and that of the empire—shall echo forevermore.” “She is hungry,” the breeze whispered into my ear. “For fame, for power, for respect. She has her mother’s hunger, and she will bite rather than starve.” Couldn’t the Yaotzin’s warnings be less cryptic? Then again, it sought payment according to the Parliament. Like any good merchant, it tempted me, teased me, but wouldn’t deliver until I showed the money. “I hope my name will be associated with greater things than flowers.” Like killing the Nightlords, for example. “What about you, Nenetl? What is your specialty?” Nenetl, who had been smelling the flowers, suddenly stiffened. “Me?” “Who else?” Ingrid asked with a displeased tone. “I… I have been told I should help you with imperial governance, Lord Iztac.” The more Nenetl spoke, the redder she became. “I can help you count the tributes, or with the administration… If you don’t like to read papers, I can do it for you… See how to build bridges too… Everyone loves bridges.” “She is like clay, soft and weak and easy to twist,” the wind whispered. “She will become either your puppet or someone else’s, bound by love’s cruel strings.” “As for the… Nightkin…” Ingrid cleared her throat, as if the very word inflicted pain upon her. “I assume she will assist you with matters related to religion and the gods’ justice.” I quickly noticed a pattern; each of the Nightlords’ chosen represented their own focus. Sugey loved war, and her representative was a fallen warrior-chieftain. Iztacoatl, who loved her spies and artistic displays, chose Ingrid. The Jaguar Woman, a sorceress and first among equals, chose a Nahualli with a focus on administration. Only Yoloxochitl’s pick differed a bit from the norm. Was there a reason behind these choices? The Parliament did mention their ritual strengthened their magic… In any case, Ingrid’s visit proved fruitful in mapping out the palace. The upper floors were mostly recreational areas dedicated to the emperor, his harem, and his core court. The middle floors contained administrative centers, libraries, and barracks. Lower servants languished on the ground floor alongside kennels, kitchens, and other facilities. In time, I might find a way to put this information to use. Our stroll through the gardens led us to an elegant fountain in the middle of an artificial grove of trees. The sunset reflected in pools of clear water; I would have loved the view if it didn’t announce the coming of the night and its horrors. “If I may be so bold, my lord.” Ingrid rested her head on my shoulder. I froze upon sensing her warm breath on my neck. “Inviting the Amazons to join our guard might have been a mistake.” I squinted at the fountain. “How so?” “They’re likely to be loyal to Chikal,” she whispered. “They will spy on you… and us.” I didn’t care which consort the guards reported to, so long as it wasn’t the Nightlords. “You would rather pick your own guards?” “I would rather my lord pick those he trusts,” Ingrid replied with a cunning smirk. So would I, but I trusted no one within these walls. “My lord was wise to curry favor from outsiders, but I would suggest recruiting from a… wider pool.” I didn’t quite understand what she was suggesting, so I kept my mouth shut and listened. Thankfully, Ingrid proved quite the talker. “The Chilams are a powerful tribe, but they share some bad blood with a few rivals. Settlements they plundered also have no reason to love them. Though they have made peace under your empire’s guidance, they would certainly relish the idea of sending their daughters to protect you from the Chilams’ influence.” “Wouldn’t that just create more bad blood?” I asked. The subtle politics of the situation escaped me, but from what I gathered, she was suggesting that I import outside conflicts into the palace. I wasn’t sure I needed more distractions. “It would keep the Chilams in check,” Ingrid countered. “And by bestowing honors on rival tribes, you will earn their gratitude and force the Chilams to work more to stay in your good graces. By setting yourself as an arbiter, you would gain more respect and influence.” “Chaos is the wellspring of power,” the wind said. “But its waters are poisoned.” That… did sound somewhat interesting. The more allies I could cultivate, the more options I would have to oppose the Nightlords down the line. Yohuachanca was built on the blood of crushed people; perhaps I could use their resentment to destabilize the empire from within? The more troubles the Nightlords faced to keep their dominion in one piece, the more leeway I would have. But chaos meant war. Innocents would pay the price for it. “I’ll admit I don’t know much about Yohuachancan rivalries,” I said. I needed to learn more to see what could be done. Ingrid’s smile widened. “I would be glad to advise you on these matters.” She was ambitious, this one. But was that a bad thing? If she hoped to gain my favor by strengthening my position, we would both benefit from it. I did wonder what she was hoping to gain. At the end of the year, we would all end up in the same place. “I will think about it,” I replied evasively. The sun was about to fully set. “Might you and the others give me a moment alone? I would like to smell the flowers and prepare myself to meet the goddesses.” “Of course, my lord.” Ingrid released my arm and offered me a polite bow. “I hope you find the clarity of mind you seek.” So did I. I wandered away from the group and closer to a grove of orchids. Of course, in my prison, I was never truly alone; my consorts and guards watched me from afar. Albeit far enough not to hear my whispers… For the wind was still blowing in my ear. Hungry for blood and secrets. I searched among the flowers for one that would serve my needs. Thankfully, the palace’s gardeners thought it wise to raise nopal cacti close to the orchids; its pads and fruits added texture to the landscape. I kept my back to the guards so they wouldn’t see me subtly pricking my index finger on the thorns and then offer a drop of blood to the wind. “I have seen Nezahualcoyotl and Chimalpopoca, two boys at my school, kissing and fucking in the toilets,” I whispered under my breath. “Although Chimalpopoca is fiancé to Ciceptl, who loves him very much and knows nothing of his indiscretion, I heard him mock her, for a woman can’t fight. He only intends to marry her for her father’s farm, then abandon her as soon as he gains honors as a warrior.” I felt dirty sharing this information. Those two had never done anything cruel to me at school except give me the cold shoulder. But the Yaotzin would only accept a secret that would hurt another. The breeze grew heavier as my Augury spell activated. I felt a malicious, unseen presence watching over my shoulders. The Yaotzin, the wind of chaos, accepted my offer. “Ask a question,” it whispered in my ear, “and we shall answer it.” I had so many questions. Whom could I trust among the consorts? What was Ingrid planning? Was Nenetl truly the meek, self-hating girl she pretended to be? I knew the spell’s limits—the greater the secret I gave away, the more I would learn. The information I provided was minor, so I couldn’t hope for much, and I wanted to test the spell before asking for truly important information. A glance at the cacti sharpened my focus. The gardens were full of poisonous flowers, and the menagerie housed enough snakes to frighten the hardiest warriors. An expert would have an easy time harvesting venom. Someone like Necahual. I’d also seen her brew potions to help others sleep. If I could learn the recipe or have her cook more for me, it would help me maximize my time in the Underworld, where I would gather the real power. Thinking of recruiting Necahual left a sour taste in my mouth. I disliked her, but she was the only person in this palace I knew wouldn’t be a thrall of the Nightlords—not after watching one of them steal her daughter, order her husband’s murder, and nearly kill her as well. However, I required insurance against betrayal. Leverage. I muttered my answer under my breath, careful to word it precisely. “What secret would make Necahual my loyal accomplice?” The breeze answered with Necahual’s voice, “I love you, Itzili.” She whispered my father’s name to the wind once, and now it echoed into my ear. “No, do not look at this woman… she is cursed… she will destroy you…” I heard sobs and pained moans. “Why did you abandon me? Why did you saddle me with that drunkard? I would have given you… everything…” Necahual had loved my father. She married Guatemoc because society demanded it of her, but he had been a second choice; my mother bewitched the man of her dreams. For a brief moment, I actually felt pity for the hag. The wound went deeper than superstition alone. When she looked at me, she saw not only a cursed beast but also the embodiment of her failed dreams. The wind whispered more words into my ear, “That witch Ichtaca… she is a sorceress… I will prove it… Where is she going so late into the night… What is…” Necahual’s words grew fearful. “What is she doing with that child?” the echo whispered, the words now little more than terrified muttering. “W-What are you, Ichtaca? You’re not… You’re not human…” Another voice as cold as ice echoed in the wind, alongside the flapping of wings and an owl’s screech. “You tell anybody what you’ve seen, and they’re dead.” I froze in shock. A litany of curses followed. “Your husband? Itzili? You tell them and they’re both dead. You tell anybody what you’ve seen and you’re dead. I will kill you. I will kill your unborn daughter. I will rip the soul from your flesh and entomb it below ground, among the dead suns and the screaming ghosts.” The Yaotzin had teased me once about the darkness inside Necahual’s heart, the ugliness buried deep inside her. Now the wind laid it bare in all its cruelest details. “I saw him play with my daughter near the river…” Necahual’s ghostly voice broke in shame and fear, her words raw with humiliation. “They looked so much like Itzili and I… Why did the gods give him his father’s face… and saddled it with that… that feathered thing’s eyes… My poor Eztli… Stay away from him… Stay away from him!” The last screech made me recoil in surprise. I nearly stumbled backward on the flowers and caught myself at the last second. “Lord Iztac!” Nenetl reacted first and hurried to my side, though Ingrid quickly outpaced her. “My lord, are you well?” Ingrid asked, suddenly all worry and concern. “Is something the matter?” “I… I pricked my finger.” I clenched my fist and chewed my lip to better hide my disgust. “It’s nothing.” “Nothing but the truth,” the wind taunted me. What was that… that cold voice? Could it have been my mother? And if she spoke of dead suns, then did that mean… “She is still down there, flying with jet-black wings on cursed winds,” the Yaotzin confirmed. “A thief of souls, hunting for secret doors and stairways into the silent dark.” My mother was like me. A Tlacatecolotl. And I would find her in the Land of the Dead Suns. part0010. 5AMONG THE GHOSTS There was an obsidian door in the palace’s basement that few could walk through. When night fell, Tlacaelel and the red-eyed guards led me to it with haste. I walked down shallow stairs dimly lit by torches on the walls, but quickly realized neither my escort nor consorts were following me. I peeked over my shoulder to find them frozen at the threshold, unwilling—or perhaps unable—to get past it. “They will not follow you down there, Iztac.” I froze as Eztli soundlessly stepped out of the shadows below me. How could she sneak up on me so easily? She had never been that quiet. “Do I frighten you?” Eztli chuckled in amusement, the light of torches reflecting on her crimson eyes. “Come on, Iztac, it’s just me.” Are you? I thought as I studied her. My dear friend smiled at me from below, a ghost rising from the darkness. Are you still in there, Eztli? I said nothing as she offered me her hand. I stared at it with hesitation before taking her fingers into my own. To my surprise, her skin was no longer cold, but tepid enough to pass for that of a living woman. She has fed. But on whom? “Come,” Eztli said. Her touch was as gentle as a lover’s caress. “I’ll guide your steps.” I gulped as we walked down the stairs. The torches offered little reprieve. The shadows were so thick in the palace’s depths that not even light appeared capable of clearing them. My steps echoed on the stone, while Eztli’s feet made no sound when they touched the floor. “I’ve heard you saved my mother from a miserable life.” Eztli’s smile faded away. “Do you remember Chimalli, Iztac?” “Your fiancé?” I asked. I suddenly realized I had no idea how the rest of our village fared since I became the emperor. “Former fiancé.” Eztli’s tone was colder than her fingers. “He was visiting me when the red-eyed priests came for our family. Do you know what he did when they ordered us to come with them to the palace, while making no secret that we wouldn’t return alive?” I clenched my jaw. I could guess the answer. “Nothing.” “Nothing,” Eztli confirmed with a hint of bitterness. “Chimalli was armed, young, and strong. But he did nothing. Said nothing. He just watched as the priests took us away, knowing full well we wouldn’t return. He was a coward.” The people of Acampa never moved a finger to help me. Why would they treat Eztli’s family any differently when faced with their gods’ judgment? “While you, Iztac, talked down a Nightlord to save Mother. A woman you hated.” When Eztli looked at me, her lovely face beamed with happiness. “You are a brave man.” Blood rushed to my cheeks. At this moment, I thought Eztli—my Eztli—had returned from the dead. “Eztli, are you…” I squinted at her, trying to find the right words. “In there?” “What do you mean?” she asked me in confusion. “Are you…” Possessed? Maddened? “You do not act like yourself.” Eztli stopped midway down the stairs, her grin faltering. “How would you expect me to act after dying?” Her words hit me with the strength of a slap to the face. “I…” My voice died in my throat as I looked down at the stone floor. “I’m so sorry, Eztli…” “No, no, I didn’t mean…” I gasped as Eztli’s lukewarm hand moved to my cheek, her forehead pressing against mine. “Don’t be sad, Iztac. I didn’t mean to hurt you, I swear.” “Eztli, this…” My voice broke in my throat. “This is all my fault. If I hadn’t defied them, you… and your father…” “No, no, Iztac, don’t say that…” She caressed my cheek. “Don’t you see? I’m not sad. I’m better.” “As a…” Monster? Bat? Fraud? “A Nightkin,” Eztli said upon letting me go. Her smile revealed the sharp fangs behind her lips. “I died a human, and I was brought back as a scion of the gods. It was an even trade.” You’re not a goddess, nor even the shadow of one. I didn’t have the strength to say so out loud. Eztli offered me absolution from my failure. She was trying to comfort me, even with lies. “As for Father, he’s not gone.” Eztli put a hand on her chest, where her heart should have been. “He’s asleep inside me now. So long as I exist, so will he. I can tell. He’s happy where he is.” I wasn’t sure Guatemoc would agree, but… I was sure of something now. In spite of her transformation, embers of the old Eztli remained alive inside the Nightkin she had become. Maybe I could find a way to revive them in the Land of the Dead Suns. I didn’t have more time to wonder. The air grew heavier inside the coiling stairs, and Eztli tensed up. An invisible force called us down from below, and it was growing impatient. “Let’s go,” Eztli said as she gently led me into the abyss. “The old bats are here.” I squinted at her insolence. “The old bats?” “I said the great bats,” Eztli lied mischievously. “You should be more careful with your words, Iztac.” I held my breath as we reached the Nightlords’ lair at the bottom—a chamber with a hundred-foot ceiling and porphyry walls. The heat was almost unbearable. Pits of blackened, boiling tar surrounded a wide dais of basalt with four alcoves at its back. Obsidian statues of the Nightlords occupied each of them. I couldn’t access them; Eztli carried me to a ledge overseeing the tar pits and facing that strange shrine of death. The Nightlords’ statues were cowled and hooded, their faces hidden behind the same masks they wore at the Scarlet Moon ceremony. Their ruby eyes glowed brightly in the darkness, and at the same time, a purple, ghostly flame began to burn on the dais, illuminating the room. I was immediately reminded of my own Teyolia burning in the Land of the Dead Suns. “Kneel, Iztac Ce Ehecatl.” Although I tried to keep my composure, I couldn’t help but freeze in dread. The Jaguar Woman’s voice came out of her totem. The statues’ obsidian meshed with the shadows and unleashed a terrifying pressure upon the room. The Nightlords were here; if not in the flesh, then in spirit. I swallowed my pride and obeyed the order. The Nightlords wanted to see me cowed; I would play along for now. “Welcome to the Abode of Darkness, my sweet emperor.” Yoloxochitl’s voice, coming from her flower-faced statue, filled me with even greater unease than her sister’s. “Thank you, my daughter, for bringing him to us.” “You honor me, mother of darkness,” Eztli said with deep reverence. Only I noticed the thin smile of distaste she hid beneath her hair. Sugey’s eyes flared into the dark, brighter than all the others. “You foolish sister of ours,” she said, her voice brimming with reproach. “What madness crossed your mind to select a Nightkin for a consort? Her Teyolia is a gasping pit of darkness, not a fire that kindles the night. She is unfit for the altar.” I kept my head down but listened carefully. It sounded like the other Nightlords were not too happy with Yoloxochitl’s choice to claim Eztli. “What surprises me is that you could uplift this peasant at all,” Iztacoatl’s statue said. “Not to mention bind her to the ritual.” “Her blood comes from a purebred stock.” Yoloxochitl defended herself. “The priests assured me as much.” A purebred stock? That confused me. Did the Nightlords require specific criteria to embrace mortals into their undead brotherhood? Why would Eztli fit them? I glanced at her, but her expression remained unperturbed. “Purebred or not, we must replace her,” Sugey stated imperiously. “Father⁠—” “Will have no cause to complain,” the Jaguar Woman cut in. The others immediately ended their bickering when she spoke. “The Scarlet Moon has risen and waned for centuries. Our magic is old, with roots as strong as those of an ancient tree. It will take more than a hurdle to disrupt the river of power. Neither can we replace the girl. Things will proceed as they must.” I noted every word, every sentence. Though I didn’t understand them all, perhaps the Parliament could shed more light on the Nightlords’ meaning. I had the gut feeling this would be important. “However, my dear Yoloxochitl, Sugey is right,” the Jaguar Woman said. I could have sworn her ruby eyes stared at Eztli directly. “This girl’s lack of Teyolia puts a drain on our covenant. This year will require more tributes to make up for the imbalance.” “I expected as much,” Yoloxochitl replied with what could pass for a sigh. “How many heads will we require, my sister? I shall provide them with haste.” “There is no need to bleed your territory yet, sister.” The Jaguar Woman’s eyes glowed in my direction. “Iztac Ce Ehecatl.” I tensed up. I knew she was about to ask something terrible of me. “Yes?” “We have graciously forgiven your insolence and allowed your dearest friend a place among the gods.” The Jaguar Woman made it sound like I should thank her for it. “For this kindness, we request ten thousand sacrifices by the time of the Summer Solstice.” The number echoed in the chamber like a curse. I remembered my predecessor’s murder on the altar and tried to imagine it happening ten thousand times. “Ten thousand?” I repeated, hoping I had misheard. “Ten thousand,” the Jaguar Woman confirmed mercilessly. “A trivial amount.” I gulped at her cruelty. My entire home village welcomed less than two hundred inhabitants; all the people I had known for my entire life wouldn’t be a drop in the bucket of blood. Ten thousand lives meant nothing to these parasites. “Where am I to find so many sacrifices in six months?” I tried to hide my disgust and horror, but failed. “You are the master of our armies, are you not?” Iztacoatl asked with a dark chuckle. “Methinks you should bloody your sword, in more ways than one.” “By our covenant, the herd of Yohuachanca is ours to cull as we see fit,” the Jaguar Woman reminded me coldly. “It matters not to us where the blood comes, so long as it flows. Fetch us tributes from foreign lands, or reap them from the people of this empire.” “Worry not, Iztac,” Yoloxochitl whispered reassuringly. “You can count on my help if you require it.” That sounded far more threatening than it had any right to be. “My chosen consort will assist you in planning further campaigns for spring and summer, Emperor Iztac,” Sugey said. “The Three-Rivers in the north are weak. The jungles to the south also abound with tributes.” “I have consulted your future, Iztac Ce Ehecatl.” The Jaguar Woman’s eyes glowed brightest in the dark. “Your reign will be an age of darkness, where Yohuachanca’s black sun shall rule absolute over the bloodsoaked lands. I have no doubt you will deliver… for you know the consequences of displeasing us.” I clenched my fists but did not argue further. “I do.” “Then go forth,” the Jaguar Woman said with a dismissive tone. “Our consorts will assist you in your task, and we shall provide you with our guidance on the sunsets to come. For the nights to come will be long.” On that, we agreed. The four statues’ eyes stopped glowing, as did the flame on the dais. My so-called masters had left, and the pressure in the room along with them. How far did this power extend? Could they contact me from all across the empire and beyond? Could I use these statues to track them down? All of these questions could wait. The task before me would prove far greater and ghastlier. Ten thousand sacrifices. The number echoed in my head as I rose back to my feet. Ten thousand souls to send to the altar. It wasn’t enough for the Nightlords to threaten my life; they wanted to make me an accessory to their crimes. “Worry not, Iztac,” Eztli said as we ascended away from the Abode of Darkness and back to the palace above. “I’m sure we’ll find a way to reach that tally.” “That’s what worries me,” I muttered under my breath. I felt sick just thinking about it. “We’ll have to play along,” Eztli replied absentmindedly. “At least until the time is right.” I squinted at her. “The time for what?” Eztli smirked enigmatically before stopping in front of a torch. “Check this out,” she said before pressing a stone right beneath the light. I heard a clicking sound. The wall then slid to the left, revealing another staircase. “Amazing, is it not?” “What is this?” I wondered in amazement. “A secret passage?” “This palace is full of them,” Eztli replied. “This one leads straight to your bedchambers.” So the Nightlords could summon me in my sleep if needed. Wonderful. Eztli grabbed my hand and led me into the secret passage before I could even think twice. “It reminds me of the days we spent exploring the capital,” Eztli mused. “Do you remember, Iztac?” “I mostly remember us getting lost,” I replied with a thin smile. “And getting into trouble. You had a knack for leading us to places where we shouldn’t have been.” “What can I say? I love my mischief.” She chuckled. “You were always too serious for your own good, Iztac.” “Easy for you to say,” I replied as we approached the end of the staircase. A wall blocked us, but I could see some light filtering through. “If I got into trouble, people would throw stones at me. When you got into trouble, you’d smile and everyone forgave you. You always had a knack for avoiding consequences.” “I concede.” Eztli smirked while examining the wall. “But look on the bright side. If you get into trouble now, people will lie for you. Or they’ll lose their heads.” I doubt that. This palace was filled to the brim with red-eyed priests. The Nightlords’ thralls understood exactly who truly commanded in these halls. I was spared from trouble, All right, but only so long as it didn’t disturb the empire’s undead masters. Eztli didn’t appear to understand that yet. A new clicking sound echoed around us, and the wall slid to the right. We walked into my royal bedroom, right next to the bed. The secret passage closed right behind us. I examined it, trying to determine what activated the sliding mechanism, while Eztli waltzed into the room as if she owned the place. “Ingrid and the others still await us at the wrong exit,” I said upon finding the trigger stone. I didn’t care much for making Tlacaelel wait, but the others deserved at least a warning. “They’ll get over it,” Eztli said behind me. I heard the sound of something falling to the ground but didn’t pay it much mind. “You’re emperor. They wait at your leisure, not the other way around.” “I’ll still ask a servant,” I said upon turning away from the wall. “Give them a warn⁠—” Her clothes were on the ground, alongside her headdress. Eztli stood next to the bed, naked, save for the golden armbands coiling around her legs and arms. She stretched like a snake in front of the window, her perfect skin gleaming under the moonlight, her lips stretching into a coy smirk. “What’s wrong, Iztac?” she asked me, her head tilting to the side. “You don’t like what you see?” My throat dried up. I stood silently, my mind in a daze, my eyes darting from her legs to her breasts. Eztli had always been beautiful, but her vampiric transformation enhanced her charms in subtle ways. Her breasts were fuller, her ass rounder, her long hair a black waterfall. Her eyes were like mirrors into her soul; I needed no whispering wind to see what was on her mind right now. “You do like what you see.” Eztli’s eyes glanced down at the spot between my legs. “I can see it rising from here.” The embarrassment was enough to shake me out of my trance. “What are you doing?” I whispered. Eztli laughed as she closed the gap between us. “We are wed, remember? I don’t mind sharing you with the others, but I was here the longest.” Her arms coiled around my neck, and she pressed her forehead against mine. “Your first time should be my privilege, don’t you think?” She pressed her lips against mine before I could answer. I had never kissed a woman on the lips before, let alone Eztli. It was strange, exciting, and terrifying. My heart pounded in my chest, and my hands trembled in shock. Her lips were eager to meet mine, but lukewarm to the touch—warmer than a corpse but colder than a living human. A jolt of pleasure traveled down my spine nonetheless. Eztli’s tongue forced its way through my teeth and played with mine. She was ferocious, so much so that I simply found myself playing along with no idea what to do. My hands moved to her back on their own. For a moment, I completely forgot about the Nightlords, the empire, the Land of the Dead Suns, and the other consorts. I could only remember her taste. I broke our first kiss all the same because, unlike Eztli, I still needed to breathe. She licked her lips while I gasped for air. Her hands reached for my cotton robes and started ripping them apart. “Stop,” I managed to blurt out. She was only doing this because the Nightlords wanted it. “You… You don’t have to do anything, Eztli.” “You’re right, Iztac,” Eztli whispered while ignoring my protests. “I don’t have to do anything anymore… but I want this. I’ve wanted it for a very long time.” Her inhumanly strong hands ripped my imperial dress in two down to my navel. It must have cost half a kingdom to make and seconds to tear it apart. When it fell to the floor, all that remained were my crown and loincloth. “There’s so many things I was afraid to do, back when I had a heartbeat,” Eztli said. “To let Chimalli take me from behind. To fuck you while Mother watched. To strangle the annoying old farts Father wanted to wed me to. Now… I’m not afraid of anything anymore.” Her hand traced a line along my chest, making me shiver. “I’ll take what I want.” Eztli licked her lips, her fangs as sharp as blades behind them. “You’ve wanted me for a long time too, haven’t you?” I gulped. Yes, I did want Eztli once. I had lived with her closely for years. We’d bathed together, played together, and laughed together. It created… feelings. But Eztli had always been out of my league. Since her parents would never have agreed to a match, I kept my fantasies in the realm of dreams. I didn’t expect them to come to life, especially now, in these circumstances. “Not like this,” I whispered, trying to find the strength to push her away. “Not⁠—” “Not if it pleases the old bats?” Eztli chuckled. “Oh, Iztac… Don’t worry about that.” She leaned closer until her lips kissed my ear. “You’re biding your time until you can kill them all,” she whispered. “I can tell.” I froze in pace. “Don’t worry, I’m not going to rat you out to the old bats. Far from it.” Her lips moved down, closer to my neck. “I will help you.” I squinted at her suspiciously. I wanted to believe her, but she had become one of them. She could be lying, whether out of her own free will or not. “You… You will?” “I’m on your side, Iztac. I’ll always be on your side.” Her lips lightly kissed me on the neck. “And besides… they’re going to kill us both if we fail. It’s them or us.” That, at least, was true. No matter how much of the old Eztli remained in the woman in my arms, our lives—her unlife—would end in a year’s time unless we could take out the Nightlords. I wanted to trust her, to at least have someone I could rely on. Eztli took away my crown, laid it on the table near the bed, and then gently pressed a finger on my chest’s mark. Before I could ask what she had in mind, she pushed me and threw me off balance. I landed on the mattress, my back against the bed. I held my breath as Eztli crawled over me. Her hands moved to my loincloth, but I instinctively stopped them with my own. I blushed when she looked at me. I’d never been so embarrassed. “Nothing will happen unless you want it to, Iztac,” she said reassuringly. “I won’t force you.” “I…” I gulped in shame. I wanted to. I deeply wanted to, but I… I didn’t know anything. “I’m… it’s…” “I know.” Eztli grabbed my left hand and pressed it against her breast. The other hand, she guided to her back. “Take your time. We’ll go at your pace.” After some hesitation, I… started fondling her breast. Playing with it. I had never done this with a girl. Never found one willing to… sleep with me. My cheeks were so flushed that I thought they would catch fire. I was afraid to do more than touch, but when Eztli moved my other hand closer to her ass, I started getting… more daring. “What do mortals say when they are wed?” Eztli mused as her hands removed my loincloth. “Till death do us part?” I didn’t answer. I was too busy touching her, exploring her, and listening to her grunts when I pinched her lightly. I worried I was hurting her until I saw her smile. I had no idea what I was doing; I acted on impulse, my body moving on its own. I was learning as I went, but it never occurred to me to stop. “Well,” Eztli whispered as her hands sat on my shoulders, her eyes looking down on me like a predator marking her territory. “You’re mine now.” And claim me for herself, she did. It took me a while to find sleep, but when I did, I rested soundly. Perhaps that was why my spirit found its way back to the Land of the Dead Suns so easily. I quickly regretted trading Eztli’s arms for Xolotl’s jaws. “Dinner time!” The god claimed his payment the moment I manifested back into the Underworld. His fangs closed on my arm, chewing my flesh. “So good!” I did not flinch at Xolotl’s touch, though I did wince. The pain in my arm contrasted starkly with the gentle kisses that preceded it. My predecessors gazed at me in silence, the cold purple rain falling down on us. The weight of their judgment bore on my shoulders. “Well, that was quite the dinner, if I do say so myself,” Xolotl said upon releasing my arm. My flesh bore fang marks, yet no blood poured out of my wounds. “You’re softer than before. Tender. More relaxed.” “He has tasted a woman’s love for the first time,” the Parliament said. I blushed at my predecessors’ bluntness. Xolotl’s whistles didn’t help either. “Do you find fault in me, my guides?” I asked my predecessors. To my surprise, the Parliament of Skulls showed me mercy. “We understand the need for relief to keep one’s inner peace. No volcano can accumulate pressure without erupting. But we offer a warning—indulge too much, and the relationship will turn around. These pleasures will become the masters, and you the slave. Doubly so when they involve the Nightkin.” I understood. Making love to Eztli had been… good. A part of me wanted to wake up, to return to her welcoming arms, to surrender as she curled her legs around me. But I had a mission to fulfill. “Do you believe her?” I asked them. “She said she wants to help me overthrow the Nightlords…” “It would not surprise us.” The Parliament’s skulls let out a disdainful rattle. “She would not be the first Nightkin to rebel against her progenitors. When one looms high above others, there will always be a resentful underling seeking to cast them down or take their place. The only thing vampires prize above their pleasure is their immortality. Having tasted death once, your Eztli will probably do anything to stay out of the grave.” I expected as much. Though Eztli had changed, she didn’t wish to die any more than I did. “Can we trust her?” “You would be a fool to do so,” the Parliament replied bluntly. “The Nightkin are bound to obey the Nightlord who created them. So long as Yoloxochitl roams the earth, your Eztli will never truly be free from her grasp; no matter how much she gnaws at her leash.” As I feared. At least this only solidified my decision to go after Yoloxochitl first. With her out of the picture, perhaps I could finally start trusting my friend again. Though I guessed that at this point, friend was too weak a word. “Is she…” I cleared my throat. “Is she still in there? Or was it all a show? I want to believe it’s the former, but… I’m not sure.” “A vampire is a shadow of life,” Xolotl mused. “The same shape, but twisted.” “We mortals keep shadows shackled in our hearts,” the Parliament explained. “Forbidden desires and secret urges. A man does not steal from another because it shames him; a woman does not cheat on her husband because she does not want to hurt them. The Nightkin show no such restraint. When their life leaves their body, so do their inhibitions. Only fear of punishment and pragmatism keep them in line.” “So…” I tried to summarize the Parliament’s words. “Eztli is still Eztli, but without her restraints?” “Without remorse or shame too. She can still feel love, but she will take what she wants when she wants and kill without remorse.” The Parliament’s eyes glowed under the pale purple rain. “Beware, Iztac Ce Ehecatl. It is our inhibitions that separate men from beasts. Tread carefully if you do not wish to be bitten.” At least the warning was stern and to the point. I would keep it in mind. I wanted to keep Eztli in my life, but I would remain wary of her. “What of the other consorts?” I asked the Parliament. “You have seen through my eyes. What is your opinion on them?” “That Ingrid is indeed one of our daughters,” the Parliament confirmed. “A dozen of us loved her mother, Lady Sigrun. Though she was never a consort, she has been a fixture of the harem for many years.” Ingrid’s mother was a concubine then. I wondered what she thought when her daughter was chosen as a consort. She had to understand what fate awaited her. “What can you tell me about her, oh Great Parliament?” “In many cases, Sigrun was our empress in all but name. She is wise, talented, beautiful… and ambitious.” Was that fondness I detected in the Parliament’s many voices? “Emperors change each year, but she remains.” “So she craves power?” I guessed. “What of her daughter?” “We never took care of Ingrid. The one that sired her joined us in death before her birth, and few of us cared about our predecessors’ progeny.” The Parliament let out a hundred shrugs. “We suspect she will seek to improve her mother and half-siblings’ situation. Sigrun has been queen of the harem for many years, and this position affords her many favors. Outsiders often tried to gain our ear through her, and she charged heavily for the privilege. Ingrid will no doubt emulate her.” In short, Lady Sigrun played the game of politics and expected her daughter to represent her interests. “I assumed as much,” I replied with a nod. “I shall approach them.” “Mother and daughter might prove useful… and good company,” the Parliament said. “As for the Nahual, she is weak and gullible. Set your claws on her. Her powers have yet to awaken, but depending on her Tonalli, they might prove useful to you both in the waking world and this one.” “Another Nahual?” Xolotl’s head perked up in interest. “Is she dog-faced?” “I don’t know,” I replied. “I cannot tell.” “I will teach you ways to awaken her animal spirit.” The Parliament trembled slightly, the skulls rearranging their position on the pillar’s surface. “As for the Amazon queen…” A skull shifted in front of all the others, its gaze baleful. I immediately recognized it—my predecessor, Nochtli the Fourteenth. “My successor, heed my words,” the skull said with a deep, imperious voice. “It is I who brought Chilam to its knees through strength and guile, but I could not have done so alone. Not without sweet betrayal.” “Chikal’s?” I guessed, my fists clenching. “She’s a traitor?” “Is it betrayal to sacrifice others to save one’s kin?” Nochtli’s skull shrugged. “Chilam had a twin sister—the city of Balam. Like siblings, they were friends and rivals, depending on the moon’s turn. When Yohuachanca came for them both, they gathered an alliance of lesser tribes to oppose us. Too few answered their call. Queen Chikal alone understood the futility of the fight.” “Oh…” Xolotl chuckled, his tongue licking his fangs. “I love where this is going.” I didn’t, but I could guess. “She betrayed her sister city to ensure her own people’s safety.” “Yes,” my predecessor confirmed. “On the night of a critical battle, she approached me with an offer—her troops would open the doors of Balam and Chilam would surrender. In exchange, her people were to be spared from the blood sacrifices.” Since Chikal became my consort and Chilam became a tributary of the empire, it meant they struck a deal. “I would have taken her to my bed as a concubine, but Nightlord Sugey wanted to taste her queenly blood,” Nochtli declared with a hint of regret. “Chikal was to serve as my successor’s consort, bound for the altar. She did not flinch at the price. Do you understand what this means?” I nodded sharply. “Chikal was ready to sacrifice her life, her pride, and her honor, if it meant keeping her city safe,” I said. “If the Nightlords threaten her sisters in Chilam, she will sell me out without hesitation. She doesn’t believe the empire can fall. At least, not yet.” “Indeed.” Nochtli’s skull merged back with the others, and the hundred voices of the Parliament spoke again. “Loyalty built on strength and fear is fickle. The Nightlords use the threat of blood sacrifices to enforce order among their vassals; they must provide tributes from outside their borders or surrender their own people.” The same choice they offered me tonight… “What am I to do with the sacrifices?” I asked with a frown. “Ten thousand souls… It boils my veins just to think of it.” Xolotl snorted. “Half as many fall down into the Underworld each day. You will manage.” “Ten thousand is a drop in the ocean of blood Yohuachanca sheds each day,” the Parliament rasped. “Such a request is far from unusual from the Nightlords.” How chilling to think ten thousand tributes were considered a routine demand… “If you require this sacrifice to destroy a greater evil, then you should pay it without hesitation,” the Parliament continued. “Follow the Nightlords’ commands. It will buy you time to continue your training.” “You suggest I sacrifice others for my own sake?” I didn’t like that answer at all. “Wouldn’t that make me the same as the Nightlords?” “You will sacrifice thousands to free millions from death and enslavement,” the Parliament replied coldly. “War offers honor and opportunities. A successful campaign will bring allies to your side. The chaos of conflict can bring the empires’ enemies out of the woods and into your embrace.” I could see the calculus behind the Parliament’s suggestion. But I did not appreciate it. “I feel like the citizens of Acampa,” I said grimly. “Averting my eyes from evil so they could continue their lives in peace.” “Must we remind you of what you told us the night we met?” The Parliament’s thousand eyes looked down on me. “That you would sacrifice anything and everything for success?” My jaw tightened. “I did not forget.” “But you do not yet understand what your vow requires.” The Parliament’s skulls let out a death rattle, the song of death. “Forget guilt. Forget remorse. Forget the grace of men and gods. No matter what crimes you commit, they are nothing in the face of Yohuachanca’s cruelty. No price is too high to topple the Blood Pyramid.” “Do not trust the skulls,” the wind’s warning echoed into my mind. “They keep secrets from you.” Now… the Parliament helped me much, and not all secrets were kept to harm others. Assuming the Yaotzin was telling the truth, my predecessors might have kept information from me simply because I wasn’t ready to learn it yet. A healthy dose of suspicion would keep me alive, but too much would poison my mind. However, I was starting to see a trend in the Parliament’s advice—since they were long dead, they had nothing left to lose anymore. They would happily watch half the world burn if it meant bringing down Yohuachanca’s undead elite. I should learn to hide my thoughts better, for the Parliament appeared to read them easily. “You think us too harsh,” my predecessors said. “But you have only witnessed a glimpse of the Nightlords’ cruelty. In time, you will reach the same conclusion. Victory justifies everything.” I prayed in my heart that they were wrong, but my head knew better. I turned my head toward the Underworld’s faded sun and its purple tears. There lay the power to bring down the Nightlords. If I could seize it before the Summer Solstice, I could avoid paying that sick tribute for appearance’s sake. “You said I must journey to the Kingdom of Mictlan to seize the dead sun’s embers, my predecessors,” I said, pointing at the spot where the purple sun’s light hit the ground. “Can you guide my way, Xolotl?” “I only guide the dead,” Xolotl replied with a snort. “Besides, the journey takes four years.” I squinted at the god. “I do not have four years.” “Well, it takes four years to reach Mictlan if you take the safe path.” Xolotl chuckled to himself. “You can simply fly your way to it. I daresay you might make the journey in a single night, though I do not guarantee your survival.” “I will take my chances.” I would shoulder any ordeal. “But must I do the journey each night?” “Once you have reached a place in the Underworld, we will guide thy soul back to it,” the Parliament of Skulls replied reassuringly. “You must seek an audience with the god Mictlantecuhtli, Mictlan’s ruler. Petition him for access to both the sun’s embers and the gate to the lower levels.” Xolotl exploded in laughter. “Fat chance with that, mortal,” he taunted me. “Lord Mictlantecuhtli is bitter and cruel. The more obstacles he puts between a mortal and their desire, the happier he becomes. I know he forces souls to wander for four years before they can even reach their final rest.” “Mictlantecuhtli is likely to demand an impossible price,” the Parliament conceded. “But his queen, Mictecacihuatl, is kinder, for she was mortal once. She might be able to lessen her husband’s demands to something reasonable if you appeal to her, Iztac.” “Like hunting down a dinosaur spirit,” Xolotl mused. “Those are such a hassle.” I regretted not paying too much attention to religion classes. I should spend some time in the daylight researching the world’s past. Still, I remembered Mictlantecuhtli’s stories vividly. When the gods tried to recreate humanity in its fifth incarnation by using the bones of the fourth, he jealously hoarded them for himself. The God-in-Spirit Quetzalcoatl barely managed to pilfer the bones and escape Mictlantecuhtli’s wrath. “Would he deliver on his end of the bargain?” I asked with skepticism. “A god is bound by his word,” the Parliament replied. “Mictlantecuhtli will complain and haggle, but if you fulfill his request, he will eventually concede.” Good. It would crush me to make such a long journey for nothing. “Is there any other spell that can help me on this quest, my predecessors?” “Alas not,” the Parliament apologized. Thankfully, they quickly suggested an alternative. “However, Mictlan is home to more than dead mortals. Forgotten gods and lost sorcerers call it their home. They can teach you magic forbidden to us. Queen Mictecacihuatl teaches the Doll spell to those she favors, and the mage Huehuecoyotl grants knowledge of the Veil. Consult with them on arrival.” “You’re sending him to meet with the old coyote?” Xolotl chuckled. “The poor lad…” I crossed my arms and glared at the dog god. “What’s so funny?” “Nothing,” Xolotl lied. “Nothing at all.” “Huehuecoyotl was a Nahualli of great power, a trickster, albeit the good-natured kind,” the Parliament explained before marking a long pause, heavy with meaning. “Expect to be pranked.” That didn’t sound so bad… I already bore many humiliations. I could survive an undead prankster. I thanked the Parliament and Xolotl for their wisdom and prepared to transform into my owl form, when I remembered something. “One last question,” I said. “Have you ever heard of a Tlacatecolotl called Ichtaca?” A tense silence fell upon the world around me. The flames in the Parliament’s eyes weakened like candles blown by the wind. Xolotl tensed up. His mocking grin turned into an expression of utter seriousness. His gaze hardened into a glare. “Why?” he asked, his tone dangerous. At this moment, I immediately realized that answering honestly would spell my doom. “I have met someone who encountered them in the living world,” I replied, not lying but not being entirely truthful either. “I wondered if she could prove an ally.” Xolotl did not move an inch. He watched me unblinkingly, searching for any hint of a lie on my face. I thanked my Tonalli for being an owl; it let me hide my unease better. “Listen well, Iztac, for I will not repeat myself,” Xolotl said. “For the sake of chewing you night after night, I will give you a free piece of advice.” I froze in silence. Xolotl never called me by my name. “Do not mention that woman’s name in Mictlan, ever,” Xolotl growled. “If you do, Lord Mictlantecuhtli will have your bones ground into dust. Remember when I told you most Tlacatecolotl answered slights with curses and calamities? Ichtaca lives up to the tales. She is a thief of souls who has committed terrible crimes against the living and the dead.” I gulped. Necahual’s memories did not paint a flattering portrait of my mother, but to hear a god speak with such gravitas… “What crimes?” “Hideous ones best left unspoken.” Xolotl shook his head. “The demoness is unwelcome in Mictlan, but she travels between worlds as she pleases. I’ve heard she makes her lair in the Land of the Dead Suns’ second level, beneath our feet. If you are smart, you will avoid her.” “Xolotl is wise in this matter,” the Parliament said. “We have heard much of this Ichtaca, and nothing good.” I kept my mouth shut. I was dying to know more, but my guides’ reaction spooked me greatly. What did my mother do to deserve such scorn? Though if she could travel between worlds, then it meant she was still alive somewhere. Should I disobey and look for her? I was emperor after all… Perhaps I could use imperial resources to investigate her from afar? Discreetly, of course. “I see,” I said. I buried my curiosity in my heart, at least for now. “Thank you for your insight.” Xolotl shook his head before leaving to take care of undead newcomers without a word of goodbye. He did not believe me and thought me a fool. “You should go now, Iztac,” the Parliament advised me. “The night is long, but shorter than you think.” Indeed. The Nightlords would not wait, and I had no time to waste. I called upon my Tonalli and began to shapeshift. My Teyolia burned with eldritch flames, and its magic twisted my body. Feathers grew over my skin and bones. My arms stretched into wings and my fingers into talons. The shadows cleared before my eyes. I was a man an instant and an owl-demon the next, strong and mighty. “We wish thee good luck,” the Parliament said. “May you find success in Mictlan.” I thanked them with a nod before expanding my wings. A mighty gust carried me into the air, under the falling rain. I glided on the wind without a sound. Owls were silent hunters, and no one could reach me above the clouds. I ascended away from the Parliament of Skulls and flew above the Land of the Dead Suns. Yoloxochitl had recalled me before I could enjoy myself a night ago. No leash called me back to the land of the living this time. I would be free to do as I wished for the next few hours. Mictlan, here I come. I relished the sensation of the wind brushing against my feathers and gazed at the faded purple sun on the horizon. Its tears and embers were waiting for me. Even the dawn will be mine. My first journey among the dead had begun. part0011. 6THE OBSIDIAN WINDS The journey started well enough, and then came the bladed winds. I followed the dim sunlight toward Mictlan for what felt like an eternity, flying over a sprawling mire of swamps and dilapidated ruins. How many empires found their way into the Underworld I could not tell, but I witnessed the process unfold midway through my flight. It started with a rumbling noise—which put me on edge since the Underworld was eerily silent save for the sound of falling rain—and falling dirt. The thick purple clouds revealed a colossal structure falling from above. A pyramid of weathered stone fell from the dead skies so slowly that I wondered if time had come to a halt. It landed in the mud below with a soft sound without shattering, like a feather on a cushion. I wondered to which nation this tombstone belonged. Unable to suppress my curiosity, I traveled above the clouds to see what lay above; after a perilous ascent that left me drenched in purple rain, I ended up facing a thick ceiling of jagged stone for my trouble. The tales of the Underworld existing deep below the earth were true. I continued my journey onward to Mictlan, but though the kingdom of the dead slowly became more visible in the distance, the air was soon thick with foreboding gloom. Shifting mists danced around long-forgotten structures on the ground below, their silhouettes casting spectral shadows onto the murk. As for the Underworld’s sky, a tempest of wailing winds soon swelled. What is this? I wondered upon seeing glittering dust in the air. It looks so… black… A blade cut into my wing and sprayed a drop of blood on my feathers. I screeched in pain and surprise, but the worst was yet to come. The wind battered against me in an unrelenting onslaught. Blackened blades no bigger than nails sliced through my flesh and bones. My wings repelled many with powerful and defiant strokes, but more projectiles followed by the hundreds; a storm of knives was upon me, each of them a promise of pain. Obsidian. The wind carried obsidian shards! “I can’t…” I grunted in pain as a shard pierced through my flank, my warm blood falling onto the ground below. New wounds appeared wherever I looked, and the tempest was only getting stronger. “I’m getting shredded to pieces!” My wings faltered, and I was forced to descend toward the mist below to avoid the worst of the tempest. I escaped the howling wind and sank into the treacherous embrace of a bloody red fog. The air was damp with an unnatural chill that clung to my feathers. I could scarcely see a few feet ahead, for even the Underworld’s purple rain failed to disperse the mists. The screeching obsidian winds turned into whispers, and the noise of flying blades swallowed by this strange weather. Have I traded one danger for another? I struggled to see anything in that dense fog. No blades hunted me here, but my gut told me I wasn’t alone either. My instincts screamed that unseen predators lurked among the mists. I looked around, but I could scarcely detect anything other than the shadows of forgotten monuments. Xolotl did say the shortest path was the most dangerous. My flight turned perilous without the benefit of sight. I nearly crashed against a fossilized tree and then a stone tower. In the end, I was forced to navigate the treacherous swamp on foot, hopping from one half-sunken stone to another. No matter how hard I flapped my wings, the bloody mists refused to disperse. They undulated and stirred, only to quickly reform into an impenetrable wall of crimson. What sorcery is this? I glanced left and right constantly. I sensed unseen eyes observing me. Am I still on the right path? I can’t see anything. “Help!” A scream echoed through the mists, followed by raucous laughter. A very familiar laughter. I froze in place and stared at the source of the sound. The odious stench of dung and filth filled my beak. “Please, someone help me!” my own voice called out from inside a pit dug into the mire. “Please!” But only the laughter of cruel boys answered the call. What little blood still flowed in my dusty veins boiled. The burning shame, the mocking faces, the tears, and the excrement… I remembered that humiliation too well. They had trapped me in a dung pit. The specter of that terrible day at school unfolded before my eyes, a ghost from a former life. I cried for hours, but nobody came. Eztli would have if we had been in the same school, but in the end, I had to climb my way out myself. I hardened my resolve and hopped away from that terrible mirage. The mists, however, did not stop taunting me. Shadows danced in the fog, their steps matched by the distant noise of harsh slaps and punches. “How many times will I have to tell you, cursed child?!” Necahual’s voice called out to me, each word filled with hate. “Never eat meat!” The sound of a slap echoed into the mist, so powerful that I felt the phantom pain in my cheek. The worst was yet to come. “This is true love, Iztac,” Yoloxochitl’s shadow taunted me. A phantom Eztli fed on the hideously disfigured corpse of her own father. The blood turned into shapeless mist, but the rancid, metallic stench smelled vivid enough to feel real. “This is what true love feels like!” Now that was a low blow. I powered through nonetheless. I shut my mind out from the insults, the taunts, and the torments of my past. These are just illusions, Iztac. Tricks meant to wear you down. They can’t harm you more than nightmares do. A girl’s scream reverberated through the mist. I didn’t recognize the voice. Another trick. Over and over again, I tried to convince myself of that. Just another illusion. The screams only became louder and filled with panic. The dread in them chilled what little blood remained in my veins. They wore me down more than all the humiliating memories that had haunted me so far. Nobody came when I screamed. Nobody ever came. But these words did not soothe my guilt. They only added to its weight. If only someone had come to my aid when I needed it… it would have changed everything. Cursing my weak heart, I rushed to the source of the noise. The fog thinned as I pressed forward, my talons landing on the plaza of an ancient city, and a dreadful sight came into view. A child’s skeleton in tattered rags cowered in the shadow of a shattered house, screaming with a little girl’s voice. A terrifying monster loomed over her, one more grotesque than any Nightkin. The shape reminded me of a spider, with eight long arms thin as needles, but no spider’s legs ever ended with grasping, chalky human hands. Its body was thin, skeletally so, and its eyeless face sported a row of sharp fangs. Four of its arms held a taller, adult skeleton in the air. The undead’s hollow eye sockets radiated with eerie light; I could see the fear in them from here. The monster’s hands twisted its limbs, bending its bones and breaking them with a sickening crack. The pain must have been atrocious, even for the dead. but the skeleton did not scream. “Run, Chipahua!” The skeleton’s voice belonged to a man, one my age from the sound of it. “Run!” But the undead child was too terrified to obey. It froze in dread as the monster played with its companion like a doll. Hesitation gripped my heart. Could this be another illusion? The undead girl’s screeches and her companion’s panicked cries sounded visceral enough to be true. I finally realized why the shortest way to Mictlan was the most dangerous—the same reason why a wise man never wandered too far from the road. Beasts ruled outside the beaten path. All dead things end up in the Underworld. Even the inhuman. The spider monster tossed the broken skeleton aside and then turned its attention to the child. A black tongue slithered between its fangs as it lingered toward its prey. I could have gone my own way. Closed my eyes. They were dead already. This wasn’t my problem. I had nothing to gain from it. Why should I put myself at risk for strangers? I wondered how many people thought the same whenever they saw me struggling. “Chimalli was armed, young, and strong,” Eztli had told me before I fell asleep. “But he did nothing. Said nothing. He just watched as the priests took us away, knowing full well we wouldn’t return. He was a coward.” A coward. If Chimalli had been braver, and I stronger, Eztli would still have a pulse today. No more. I wouldn’t run again. I jumped into the fray. Owls were silent hunters, and the monster did not see me coming in time. My sharp talons lunged at its chalky chest, slashing the dust-dry flesh. The creature shed no blood, but it snarled in savage pain nonetheless. Its hands moved away from the child and swiftly swiped at my throat in an attempt to strangle me. I pushed it back with a mighty flap of my wings, evading the assault with grace. Curse me. I unfurled my wings in an attempt to intimidate the monster into running away. The undead child recoiled in fear of us both. Curse my foolishness! “Run!” I shouted at the skeletal girl. “Get back to your friend and leave!” “We…” The older skeleton’s hollow eyes lit with hope. “We’re saved…” Far from it. Though my Tonalli form was big, so was the monster. It became wary, but it did not run away. It started moving slowly to the side, circling me like a predator waiting for an opening. I tried to remember my fighting lessons at school. When aiming to kill, go for the head, the throat, or the stomach. Except the teachers prepared me to fight my fellow man, not a monster from the Underworld. The Parliament warned me that death here meant the destruction of my soul. My life was on the line. The monster lunged at me without warning but with unnatural speed. I couldn’t react in time and ended up tumbling back onto the plaza. I clawed and pecked, it scratched and clawed. Well-rehearsed drills never prepared me for the chaos of actual battle. We brawled on old stones and broken bricks, but the beast had eight hands to my two wings and talons. It quickly pinned me to the ground and started punching my face into the pavement. I’d been punched in the past, whether at school or out of it. This monster was neither a bully my age nor a teacher pulling back their strength to teach me a lesson. Its blows pounded my skull with such violence that I heard the stone beneath me crack. These punches would have cracked a man’s head open, but my Tonalli was made of stronger stuff. Still, it hurt. It hurt. Four of the monster’s hands strangled my throat with an inhuman grip, while the rest either punched my face or pinned my wings to the ground. “You are young and weak, Tlacatecolotl.” The creature’s voice was eerily gentle, even as it choked the life out of me. “Bleed for me, owl-fiend. Let me taste your tender soul…” I extended a talon with the strength of despair and managed to strike at the monster’s chest, leaving a large gash where its heart should have been. The monster did not recoil from me, but its grip weakened enough for me to shake off some of its arms. I dodged by moving my head to the left when it tried to punch me again, then bit one of its wrists. My beak snapped on its bones and cut the hand off the arm in a single strike. Dust poured out of its veins rather than blood. This time, the maimed creature pulled back in agony. I pushed it back across the plaza with a blow from my talon, then quickly hopped back to my feet. Blood dripped from the cuts left by the obsidian shrapnel, and my vision blurred a bit from the blows to my head. The pain, I could manage; a lifetime of humiliation had given me more resilience to it than most. Most importantly, the girl had retreated to her companion’s side and was trying to drag him away from danger. I needed to keep the monster off their backs. “Is that the best you can do?”I taunted the creature, unfurling my wings. The monster snarled and lunged at me once more, albeit short of an arm. I saw it coming this time and took to the air. The beast landed on an empty spot. Without wasting a moment, I immediately swooped in. My talons closed on its back, and now it was my turn to hold it. A spider held the advantage on the ground, but owls ruled above in the sky. I carried the wailing monster above ground, for it was surprisingly light and I was strong. Its angry snarls echoed across the plaza as I carried it upward. It only emboldened me. I looked around and spotted a jagged, half-broken stone nearby. I flew straight at it, a devious idea crossing my mind. One of the monster’s hands lunged for the left side of my head and shoved a finger into my eye. A sharp surge of agony erupted in my head, and half my vision went dark. A red veil fell over my wounded eye. It took all my strength and rage not to scream and cover my face. The monster’s claws scratched at my throat and at my chest in a final attempt to free itself. “Die!” I furiously snarled while diving down. “Die, die, die!” I slammed the monster against the jagged rock and impaled it through the chest. A sickening crack followed as the impact cut my enemy open, spraying dust all over the ground. The arms wriggled and trembled, but I did not stop. I slammed the creature down, down, down, until the monster snapped in half like a broken brindle. The hand that once impaled my eye fell off to the side. And I felt… I felt happy beyond words. The sheer rush of pleasure that coursed through my veins made even Eztli’s kisses pale in comparison. The thrill of victory washed away the soreness in my muscles and the pain coursing through my body. I hopped onto the corpse like a giddy child, relishing the sound of its bones cracking under my weight. So many tormentors crossed my path. My classmates, Necahual, the Nightlords… I had borne the insults and beatings, but for the first time in my life, I had stood up to and killed one of them! I fought back and won! More, I vowed to myself. When the rush faded away, the only thought on my mind was how to experience it again. More will follow. There is no pleasure greater than a satisfied grudge. Exhaustion followed the thrill of victory. After making sure the creature was well and truly dead, I landed back on the plaza. I was so tired that I would have to return to my human form for a while. My wings folded back into arms and my talons into feet; my left eye did not grow back. I covered it with a hand, blood dripping between my fingers. Teachers taught me battle was a glorious thing. They had been right. A fight to the death was a gruesome affair, but it only made victory taste all the sweeter. I considered the loss of my eye an acceptable trade-off for that brief moment; for once in my life, I felt justice had been served. “I can’t believe it…” I turned my head to look at my side. The undead girl carried her broken companion on her shoulder as best she could. “You’ve killed it.” “I think so,” I replied doubtfully. The creature no longer moved, but we were in the land of the dead. What did Xolotl say? In the Underworld, it is always possible to be deader. “What was that thing? A demon?” “I’m not sure,” the older skeleton replied with a thankful nod. “We are indebted to you, owl-spirit. Thank you for saving my sister.” The girl observed me warily before imitating her brother. Though I still frightened her, she eventually tore off a part of her rags and approached me with it. When I realized what she intended to do, I knelt. The little girl kindly bandaged my eye with her own clothes, stopping the bleeding. The interaction filled me with a strange warmth. Is this what gratitude feels like? Sweet and soothing? It almost made the loss of my eye feel worthwhile. I could get used to it. “Thank you,” I told the girl, who nodded at me shyly. “My name is Ueman,” the older skeleton introduced himself. “This is my sister, Chipahua. We were on our way to Mictlan when that creature attacked us.” “My name is Iztac,” I introduced myself before voicing my confusion at his words. “Wasn’t the god Xolotl meant to guide you to it?” “He guided us for two years until we entered these mists,” Ueman replied with a hollow rattle. “We lost sight of him days ago and have been wandering this place since.” The god made for a poor guide then. I hoped I wouldn’t wander these mists for years; I might need to risk facing the cutting winds above in spite of the risks. “We shouldn’t linger long,” I said while glancing around. With half my vision gone, I felt more vulnerable than ever before. “Other creatures might lurk in the fog.” Ueman nodded slowly, his hollow eyes shining with the light of hope. “Lord spirit, if I might ask⁠—” “I am no spirit, nor am I a lord,” I replied. I was an emperor, but I would rather die than take pride in it. “You want me to carry you to Mictlan, am I wrong?” “I… I cannot move in my current shape, great and powerful Iztac.” Ueman lowered his head in shame. “Might you find the kindness to take my sister to Mictlan in my stead? She deserves a peaceful afterlife.” “Brother!” The girl shook her head in panic. “I… I shan’t abandon you here!” “I cannot stand nor wield a weapon,” Ueman replied with resignation. “I cannot crawl, let alone protect you. I will be a burden.” Leaving Ueman here meant abandoning him to a fate worse than death. Yet he was willing to entrust his sister to a stranger and stay behind because he thought I was unlikely to accept dead weight. His selflessness made me wish I’d had an older brother. This place would be the death of me. The second one at least. “I can carry you easily too,” I said with a sigh. Curse my weak human heart. “I…” Ueman hesitated. “I do not wish to bother you, great Iztac. We have nothing to pay you with.” “You do not need to. I was going to Mictlan anyway.” I shrugged. “Give me a moment to recover and I will carry you both to your eternal rest, if I can.” “I… I have no words.” Ueman finally understood my offer was genuine and nodded in gratitude. “Thank you so much.” “Thank you,” Chipahua said with a little, adorable voice. I had no idea how to answer. I rarely ever had people say those two words to me. So I simply nodded in silence. After a short rest, I recovered enough willpower to transform back into my Tonalli form. It felt much easier to transform in the Underworld than manifest it in the waking world above. Chipahua climbed on my back and bloodsoaked feathers while I held her brother in my talons. He was so light, so fragile. “Prepare yourself,” I said. “I will fly as close to the mist as I can to avoid the cutting wind, but we might suffer from attacks.” “Yes, Lord Iztac,” Chipahua answered. It annoyed me to hear the lord part, but I couldn’t fault a child. Carrying these two proved easy; navigating between the treacherous marshlands and the obsidian skies, far less so. I had to travel up and down to avoid the dangers of both. Whenever I came too close to the tempest above, I had to dive back into illusion and ruin-ridden mists where I couldn’t see more than ten feet ahead. The journey felt like an eternity. Still, having companions helped a bit. Chipahua warned me whenever glass shards from above threatened to fall on us, and Ueman often noticed obstacles I couldn’t see in time. After what felt like an eternity, we finally left both of them behind us. The fog cleared, and the tempest did not pursue us further. The fading mists revealed a most impressive sight. Something I had dreamed of but never gotten the chance to witness for myself. The sea. A peaceful expanse of serene purple water stretched across the horizon. The great lakes near the capital looked like puddles in comparison. Its surface simmered like an obsidian mirror, with the gloomy light of the Underworld’s sun casting an ethereal glow on the ebb. The air was heavy with a salty, oily smell, and the waves moved slowly in tune with the falling rain. After the harrowing journey through the mists, the sight soothed my heart like balm on a wound. “There, brother.” Chipahua pointed a finger at the horizon. “I see it!” So did I. Though the layer’s sun shone impossibly high in the sky, the tear of light it shed hit an island below—a fortress with chalky walls of dizzying size that seemed carved from the bones of a giant creature. A vast necropolis of fanged towers sprawled behind them, their tops shining with a greenish, ethereal glow. All of them paled in size, however, compared to the colossal black mountain in its center, which the pillar of sunlight bathed in its dim radiance. “Mictlan,” Ueman whispered in awe. “The kingdom of the dead.” “Seems so,” I said. “But we haven’t reached it yet.” I’d grown bitter enough over time to realize that the gods liked to snatch despair from the jaws of victory at the last second. I flew across the purple sea without lowering my guard. More trouble might await us ahead. Rainwater drenched my feathers and bandage alike as I carried on. The rhythmic lapping of the waves below became a haunting melody, one that failed to put me at ease. I often glimpsed shadowy forms beneath the water; the slithering shape of a fish the size of a man; skeletal fins peeking above the surface; reptilian eyes looking up at me from below. I flew high enough above the sea to avoid danger, but these half-unseen presences unsettled me. “What are those?” I wondered. “Fish do not grow larger than men.” “They were men once,” Ueman said. “Xolotl taught us that when Chalchiuhtlicue’s tears drowned the fourth world, the old mankind drowned. When the goddess realized her mistake, she attempted to save the old mankind by turning them into fish. I often wonder what the gods will turn the current one into.” “Not bats, I hope,” I replied. “How did the two of you end up down there?” Chipahua bristled at the question, but her brother answered in her stead. “We starved,” he explained. “A drought devastated our village and we perished.” A famine? There hadn’t been a large famine in many, many years. “Under which emperor did the two of you live?” “Emperor Xicohtencatl the Tenth,” Ueman replied innocently. “Why?” I wisely kept my mouth shut. That emperor ruled over forty years ago. These two hadn’t wandered the mists for days, but decades. I thanked the gods for granting me wings. Otherwise, we would have remained stuck for who knew how long. I wondered how many other souls wandered that fog of memories for years. Mictlan grew larger with time, enough that I finally began to comprehend the realm’s true scope. The distant walls were mountains of animal bones piled up together until they reached taller than any mortal building. They stretched so far and wide that I struggled to imagine the size of the city behind. Yohuachanca’s capital could be no bigger than a district in comparison. As for the spires, now that I looked closely… They reminded me of bony fingers reaching for the sky. “There!” Chipahua pointed at my left. “I see a bridge!” I turned my head. Indeed, an impossibly long bridge of smooth obsidian stone emerged from Mictlan and sprawled across the sea. A near-endless procession of skeletons walked along its edge, guided by Xolotl… more than one. To my surprise, a dozen near-identical siblings of the god each shepherded their own group of the dead onward to their final destination. I supposed it made sense. Xolotl was infamously the god of twins, and I mentally beat myself over thinking he could personally escort every single soul that died each day. “I shall deliver you back to your shepherd,” I whispered to my passengers. “Hopefully, he won’t lose you this time.” “You shouldn’t insult the gods,” Chipahua scolded me. Her brother simply laughed. I flew closer to the bridge, only to hear strange sounds coming from behind—a faint whistle, almost inaudible. I peeked over my shoulder but saw nothing other than rain. Chipahua glanced around in confusion. “Is something troubling you?” Ueman asked. Yes, but I couldn’t tell what. Just a general sense of unease. My lone remaining eye darted from left to right, looking for something it couldn’t see, but that I knew was here. I heard a whistling noise coming from my blind spot. Only my owl form’s sharpened reflexes and a startled cry from my passengers let me dodge the surprise attack. An arrow flew past me and barely missed my throat. I peeked over my wing and blinked in mute amazement. Hands. Ghostly, floating hands materialized above me, each of them carrying an all-too-solid bow and arrows. I counted dozens of them aiming at my back, tugging at their bows’ strings. “Hold on!” I shouted a warning before diving down. A bombardment followed. Arrows soared through the air in volleys, deadlier than the obsidian winds from earlier. I descended down toward the sea to avoid them. The hands that fired immediately vanished upon missing their mark… only for others to reappear on my sides, each of them raising their bow for the kill. I did my best to fly around without accidentally throwing Chipahua off my back. I dodged nine projectiles before a tenth hit me in the flank. I let out a cry of suffering as I felt the metal arrowhead pierce through my feathers and flesh. If I get to the bridge, Xolotl will have to intervene. As I thought, I desperately flew toward the procession of the dead. Or we could hide among the dead and⁠— And then I froze in midair. My wings stopped flapping, and yet I did not fall. My back stretched until I heard cracks in my bones, yet my muscles no longer obeyed me. Phantom fingers tightened on my throat, but no floating hands touched my feathers. I’d already been there before—when the Jaguar Woman choked the life out of me with her mind alone. This time was worse, however. The invisible force that took me over now tightened its grip on my entire body rather than my lungs alone. Then I heard a voice coming from nowhere and everywhere at once. A woman whose words carried the weight of eternity and cold, dead wrath. “Coming back to my domain was a mistake, Spirit-Thief.” A flash of agony surged through my wings. A dozen arrows nailed me in an impossibly straight line that went from one end to the other. They fell around the terrified Chipahua without harming her, but that was meager reassurance to me. I would have shrieked if I could still move my beak. My blood fell into the sea below and drew the attention of swimming forms under the waves. The beasts had caught a whiff of an incoming meal. The ghostly hands that harassed me reappeared to grab a squealing Chipahua and her brother alike, carrying them away from me. My lone remaining eye, the only part of me that I could move, looked up as a mysterious figure materialized near them. The air grew palpably thick as the entity took shape in a swirl of ash and bone dust. She was a corpse, both horrifying and awe-inspiring in equal measure. Flowing robes woven from funerary shrouds and marigolds swirled around her flayed flesh. Her eyes were empty holes shining with a red glow brighter than any star; sharp fangs adorned her skeletal maw; and a divine red flame burned between her exposed ribs. Flowing ebony tresses cascaded down from an obsidian crown and onto her back. The figure looked so gaunt, so frail, yet the otherworldly aura emanating from her wore down on me more than the Nightlords’ combined malevolence. Her allure carried more weight than the wisest elders or the most ancient of creatures. When her unnerving gaze met my eye, I felt naked and weak. She was what the Nightlords could pretend to be, like ephemeral shadows cast by great pyramids. A goddess. “Lady Mictecacihuatl,” Ueman muttered in awe. His sister shivered in silent dread, as she did when the monster threatened her. “Oh Great Queen of the Underworld.” To my surprise, the ancient goddess answered by petting the terrified Chipahua and her brother on the head. A reddish glow traveled through Ueman’s body. His bent, broken bones twisted back into their proper shape. “I bid you welcome into my king’s domain, lost souls,” the queen greeted the siblings with gentleness that belied her inhuman appearance. “You are safe now.” She… was kind to strangers? After watching the Nightlords’ cruelty, I simply couldn’t believe my eyes. Though the Parliament warned me that Mictecacihuatl was kind to mortals and well-disposed to helping them, all I could think of was how Yoloxochitl's innocence hid the malice beneath. Mictecacihuatl did show her malice quickly, just not toward the siblings. The goddess’s tone harshened noticeably when she turned her attention toward me. “The thief that took you away will be duly punished.” If I cannot talk my way out of this, I am dead. I tried to open my beak to argue, to plead my case, to tell her this was a misunderstanding. I failed. My body wouldn’t budge. Please goddess, let me explain! “Oh goddess, Iztac is no thief.” Few would have dared to talk back to a goddess. Thankfully for me, Ueman was one of them. “He guided us to your kingdom, so we could enjoy our proper rest.” “Iztac?” The name confused Mictecacihuatl enough to briefly dispel the veil of her rage. She examined me closely, the fire in her hollow eyes vacillating. “Who are you? You look like her, but you lack her strength and malice.” I could guess who Mictecacihuatl was speaking of. I was starting to wonder what my mother had done to earn a goddess’s ire. I shapeshifted back into my human form, shedding a few arrows and keeping others scarcely woven into my flesh. My entire body hurt. Though the queen’s magic kept me floating up in the air, she released her grip just enough to let me speak. I still had a chance to talk things through. “Oh Great Mictecacihuatl, it is an honor for me to meet you.” Mictlan’s queen was the keeper of humanity’s bones and protector of the dead. Even if I didn’t need her help—or were at her mercy—I would have shown her respect. “I am Iztac, a Tlacatecolotl. I seek an audience with your husband as part of a quest to destroy a great evil.” “A great evil?” The goddess observed me closely and noticed the chains binding my Teyolia. Her flayed forehead arched in what could pass for pity. “The curse of Yohuachanca binds your soul…” “The Nightlords have condemned me to death in a year,” I explained. “I seek help in freeing my soul and those of my predecessors from them.” “I am truly sorry, Iztac of Yohuachanca. If I could remove your curse, I would.” Queen Mictecacihuatl shook her head. To my shock, she sounded entirely genuine. “I cannot break it, and neither can my husband. Your soul is already promised to another deity.” Another deity? “The Nightlords are no goddesses.” “No vampire is, but the curse originates from a true deity,” Queen Mictecacihuatl replied calmly. “A god of pain and hunger that crawled from the depths below an age ago, beholden neither to the living nor the dead. Your soul is promised to their waiting jaws.” Could she be talking about the First Emperor? Was he even real? “Oh Great Queen of the Dead, can you tell me more?” I pleaded. “Any information can help.” “I know little, unfortunately. My husband’s dominion only extends to this layer, as does mine.” Mictecacihuatl appraised me for a moment before guessing my intent. “You seek entry into the lower layers of the Land of the Dead Suns, do you not?” “Yes, I do.” I nodded slowly and glanced at the fading sun with my remaining eye. “I was also told Chalchiuhtlicue’s embers carry the power I need to defeat the Nigthlords.” “I see…” The Queen of the Underworld’s skeletal, ghoulish face showed no hint of emotion. Her silence, however, carried the weight of her judgment. I would have paid a great deal to the Yaotzin to learn what was on her mind. She turned her attention back on Ueman and his sister. “What are your names?” “Ueman, oh Great Queen of the Dead,” the undead said with a respectful nod. His sibling bowed slightly but remained too fearful to answer herself. “Forgive my sister, Chipahua. She is young.” “There is nothing to forgive.” Mictecacihuatl gently patted Chipahua’s head, soothing the child. “You will join the procession of the dead, where my attendants will assign your souls to a district. I wish you a peaceful eternity in my king’s domain.” “We are grateful for your mercy, goddess.” Ueman thanked me with the same reverence he showed to Mictecacihuatl. “It seems our paths are to diverge here, Iztac, though I hope they cross again. I thank the heavens we met.” “Goodbye.” Chipahua waved a gentle hand at me. “Take care.” “I bid you good luck,” I replied with a light heart. Mictecacihuatl’s ghostly hands carried Ueman and his sister away toward the bridge. Once we were alone, she breathed a cloud of ash at me. The dust was warm and banished my pain. The arrows searing my flesh vanished, and the bloody wounds staining my skin closed on their own. The bandage around my lost eye flew away, yet I found myself staring normally again. The goddess had healed my woes and granted me back my vision. “I apologize for unduly harming you,” said the queen. “The last Tlacatecolotl to visit our realm pilfered souls away and I mistook you for her. I should have been more careful.” I… I simply didn’t know how to answer. I waited for the knife to fall, for the goddess to reveal her inner cruelty like Yoloxochitl before her. When no betrayal followed this kindness, I could only ask, “Why did you heal me?” “I am the keeper of humanity’s bones, not their tormentor. I unduly caused you harm, and you should not suffer from my mistake.” Mictecacihuatl joined her hands in a regal, dignified pose. “For returning those lost souls to me, I shall intercede in your favor. My husband shall listen to your plea, though I cannot guarantee he will fulfill it.” She… was reasonable? Grateful? Could gods show mercy? The idea seemed unfathomable, and yet, here we were. “I am in your debt, goddess,” I said with deep respect. “No. It is I who owes you.” Mictecacihuatl studied my face carefully. “How much do you know of your powers, Tlacatecolotl? Can you travel freely between the world above and this one already?” “I can, oh Queen of the Underworld.” I could tell my powers interested her. Mayhaps I could use that to learn the Doll spell from her. “How can I be of service?” “We shall speak of it later.” The goddess flew away, her invisible power carrying my body into the air after her. “Do you know the meaning behind my husband’s name?” “Of course I do,” I replied. “Mictlantecuhtli means Lord of Mictlan. Everyone knows that.” “But few understand its significance. Namely, that Mictlan came first.” Our flight led us above the bone walls. “See for yourself.” The Kingdom of Mictlan unfolded behind the fortifications, a sprawling metropolis that dwarfed Yohuachanca’s capital in size and scope. A country’s worth of purple water canals, regal porphyry domes, bone spires, and maze-like streets paved with gray, fossilized skin stretched across the horizon, yet its twisting alleys were strangely lively nonetheless. Hordes of skeletal dead walked across basalt plazas to trade to the tune of flutes and drums. The dead had no need for food or drinks, but like in the world above, that did not stop merchants from selling obsidian jewelry, dusty scrolls, pottery, and other wares. Every building looked different from the next, as if a hundred civilizations had come together to build echoes of their past into the Underworld. However, the true nature of the city soon became clear to me. The colossal towers I glimpsed reminded me of fingers because they were fingers. A great spine road crossed Mictlan, and a plaza was built atop ribs longer than rivers. The great black monolith from earlier now revealed its shape to me—that of a massive human skull larger than my imperial palace. The light of the Underworld sun fell upon its crown of obsidian, yet it did not shine half as bright as the twin blue stars in its eye sockets. Though half a kingdom separated us, I could tell they were staring at me with deadly intent. “Here is my husband, Mictlantecuhtli, who has ruled in Mictlan since the first death.” Mictecacihuatl chuckled to herself. “For king and kingdom are forever one.” part0012. 7MOTHER OF BONES The Lord of the Underworld granted me an audience at the foot of the mountain they called his chin. Unlike the emperors above, Mictlantecuhtli kept no court. No swarm of servants gathered around his skull to sing his praises. In fact, the lively music that echoed in his city turned to silence within a league of the head that oversaw it all. Not a single drop of rain would fall on the god’s ancient bones. I stood in an empty plaza of ashes and dust on which no wind blew, with only a quiet queen for company. The sound of my steps was smothered into nothingness as I knelt, and when I opened my mouth to plead, no words would come out of it. Mictlantecuhtli was death, and noise was life. The two stars in the god’s empty eyes burned with an ethereal glow. The hundred eyes of my predecessors looked no brighter than candles in comparison. Their ethereal radiance dimmed even the pale sunlight falling on Mictlantecuhtli’s obsidian crown. You could burn a hill of firewood inside them. The weight of Mictlantecuhtli’s gaze crushed me. A pressure many times greater than the one his wife used to manipulate my body fell onto my shoulders with a slow, deliberate push. Was this how ants felt when a man looked down upon them? As I felt the god’s presence in my bones, in my mind, and in my very soul, I finally understood why I could never fully believe the Nightlords were goddesses. A true god did not have power. They were power, as omnipresent as the wind and as eternal as the dirt beneath mortal feet. “I hear your heartbeat, little bird. A rare sound in my gray city.” His words were a whisper in my skull, spoken out in a rasping echo of my voice—the voice I would have at death’s door. “Are you a dream of mine?” Mictlantecuhtli uttered no threat, but I instantly knew a single misstep would mean my utter ruin. His queen had threatened to snap me in half with a wave of her hand. Her husband could ruin me with a thought. I knelt before the gods, and I sensed a force giving me permission to say words. “No, oh Great Lord of the Underworld,” I said. “I am not dead, but I am dreaming as we speak.” “You are mistaken.” There was no emotion in Mictlantecuhtli’s voice. Each of his words carried the stillness of death. “What is life but a dream, a fleeting illusion full of sorrow and suffering? Death is the true awakening, and the eternity beyond… the truth.” I pondered each word I could speak aloud. Should I flatter him? Speak my mind? Xolotl did warn me that Mictlantecuhtli was bitter and cruel… “You wonder whether you should lie to me.” Mictlantecuhtli’s eyes flickered for a second, as if amused by my unease. “Bitter truths and sweet lies taste the same to he who has no tongue left. Neither will save you now.” Many said that to better disguise their vanity. Still, I did not come here to deceive Mictlantecuhtli, and discovery might mean my destruction. “With all due respect, Lord Mictlantecuhtli,” I replied candidly. “I would rather delay my death for as long as possible.” “Those who marked you will not show this mercy. I pity you and the others, trapped in a nightmare between life and death. Know that if I could welcome you all into my gray city, I would.” “I… Thank you, Lord Mictlantecuhtli.” I lowered my head. “My predecessors and I seek only to do so in due time. I have to plead for your help in their terrible task.” “You presume too much of me.” Though Mictlantecuhtli’s tone did not change, I could sense a touch of disdain in his voice. “I was put here at the dawn of life, like the night follows the dawn, to rule the house of the dead. A king has no sway over a kingdom that is not his own, no more than a flame can become wet. I cannot break your curse, nor will I destroy your enemies for you.” I guessed as much. “I understand, Lord Mictlantecuhtli. Forgive my insolence. I came for guidance in how to deal with the leeches above that prevent so many from passing on.” “Learn patience,” Mictlantecuhtli replied calmly. “Everything dies in time, even worlds. Those who hold your soul captive will eventually pass like all the others, and then you will earn your rest.” He was never alive in the first place, so he does not value life at all. The righteousness of my cause did not matter to him because the cause itself felt insignificant to a creature so old and powerful. Mictlantecuhtli had witnessed the first dawn and would survive the last. A few centuries of suffering would be horrendous to me and my predecessors, but they would pass in the blink of an eye for him. Once again, I remembered my encounters with the Nightlords—the false gods who were all too human in their cruelty. They bickered, followed their whims, and punished defiance with violence. There was nothing human about a true god like Mictlantecuhtli. He was a force of nature, a fundamental pillar of the universe. Why would the wind care about human wars and sorrows? It would keep blowing until the world’s final night. Xolotl had been mistaken. It wasn’t that Mictlantecuhtli was cold and cruel. He was something far worse. Uncaring. His queen, however, cared enough to speak in my favor. “You speak true, my king, as always,” she said with a gentle voice. “However, can a child be expected to learn without making mistakes first? It would be kind to let him burn his hand so that he learns to fear fire.” The god’s eyes flickered once more. “On what pyre does this bird wish to burn?” Since Mictecacihuatl did not answer her husband, I guessed she gave me an opportunity to plead my case. “The sun that shines above your head, oh great and powerful master of death,” I said. “And the three others below your realm.” “Then you are mad, little bird.” A terrifying cloud of black smoke erupted from Mictlantecuhtli before dissipating into nothingness. A god had just snorted at me. “I created this place from my own bones so that the dead could find rest. I hold sway over the souls that trickle down from above, but the things that haunt the stillborn worlds beneath us answer to no one. If you wander into the depths, you will face fates far worse than centuries waiting on a threshold. Nothingness would be a mercy.” To hear these words from Mictlantecuhtli shook me to my core. It was one thing to hear warnings from the Parliament of Skulls and another from a god older than time. Mictlantecuhtli had witnessed all deaths since the beginning of life. If he said that what awaited in the depths could prove worse than centuries trapped in a reliquary, then he meant it. “But would I find the power I seek?” I asked. “The power to destroy the Nightlords and free my people?” “You might,” the god conceded. “Many have descended into the Land of the Dead Suns searching for knowledge, treasures, and sorcery. Few returned, and fewer with what they were looking for.” “But some did,” I pointed out. “Yes.” The risks were great, but so were the rewards. If it had only been my death and suffering on the line, perhaps I would have heeded Mictlantecuhtli’s warnings. But after seeing what happened to Eztli, my predecessors, and so many others… I would fight on. Even if the Nightlords might eventually face justice, they could also haunt the world until its final days. I would not wait so long. The sacrifices, the wars, the cruelties—they all had to stop. I was not the first emperor, but I would do everything in my power to be the last. “Your words are not wasted on me, Lord Mictlantecuhtli.” I lowered my head to show respect. “But still, I ask your permission to carry on with my quest. I beg you to let me feed on the embers of the four suns that came before, so that I might free my people from harm.” “Compassion is not the heavens’ currency.” Mictlantecuhtli’s silence stretched on for over a minute—an eternity for me, and an instant for the god. “We only accept three coins—pleasure, knowledge, and power. If you wish to claim Chalchiuhtlicue’s embers and access to the lower depths through my Gate of Tears, then you must pay a toll.” Here came the hard part. “What is thy price, Lord Mictlantecuhtli?” The chalky hills that made up Mictlantecuhtli’s teeth slowly started to look like a ghastly smile. “I want your sun.” The word hung into the air like a curse for a minute before I dared to look up at the god. “My sun?” I repeated, dumbfounded. “The sun that shines on the living?” “You seek to feast on a dead sun’s embers like a jackal when there are living stars in the living world above. Only life can pay for death.” The ground shook beneath my feet. Mictlantecuhtli’s chuckles shook the city enough to start faint quakes. “A sun for a sun would make for a fair trade.” When I recoiled at the impossible task, Queen Mictecacihuatl came to my rescue. “My king, must I remind you that the last time two suns coexisted in the sky, the land burned to cinders? A second sun would torment us all should that mortal succeed.” “True.” Mictlantecuhtli pondered her words in silence before coming up with an “easier” alternative. “Then I shall ask for an ocean of blood to add some color outside. Chalchiuhtlicue has shed enough purple tears.” I thought it was a joke at my expense for a second, until I realized I heard neither cruelty nor mockery in the god’s voice. He asked the same price as the Nightlords for his favor, but not out of hunger or viciousness, but out of cold detachment. Mictlantecuhtli truly believed that trading an ocean of death for a sun’s embers was a fair trade, the same way a merchant would sell pottery for a coin. “Your generosity knows no bounds, my king,” Queen Mictecacihuatl replied with a short bow. “I shall show this child the way around the city.” When I tried to open my mouth to protest, I felt a slight, gentle pressure snapping my jaw shut; not the overwhelming power of Mictlantecuhtli, but the gentler scolding of his wife. I understood the message quite clearly—do not tempt fate. “Yes, do so,” Mictlantecuhtli replied. If he noticed his wife’s action, he did not comment on it. “The bird is too quick for my taste. Let him return when he can pay his tribute.” Queen Mictecacihuatl released her hold on my jaw and allowed me to pay my homage one last time. “I thank you for your generosity, Lord Mictlantecuhtli,” I said with a deep bow, though I struggled not to argue over the price he demanded. “If I may, though, I would like to receive your wisdom on one last matter.” “One question I shall answer,” the god replied. “No more.” “Your great queen mentioned that the vampire curse originated from a god of pain and hunger that crawled out of the Underworld,” I said. “Do you know more?” “Were my words wasted on you?” Mictlantecuhtli snorted once again, his breath an eruption. “Many wandered into the depths in search of power… and a few returned with it.” A chill traveled down my spine as the full implications of Mictlantecuhtli’s words dawned on me. The Land of the Dead Suns held many secrets. Including that of godhood. I thanked Mictlantecuhtli one last time and let his queen guide me away. We walked down a road of fossilized bone and amber that led into the city proper. The further we walked away from Mictlantecuhtli, the louder our steps became. At no point did the god ever ask for my name. To Mictlantecuhtli, I was nothing but another ant in an endless line. Even a Tlacatecolotl was barely worthy of remembrance. “You handled my king well,” Queen Mictecacihuatl said. “He is usually stricter with the living.” Was she joking? This whole deal was a farce! “Where am I supposed to find an ocean of blood, let alone transport it into the Underworld?” “You will find a way,” Mictecacihuatl reassured me with a kind, gentle tone. “My king believes those who do not struggle to earn their reward will fail to appreciate it. He has put many harsh ordeals before those who sought entrance to the depths, but the gods made humans clever, and we are bound by our word. Remember that.” Though I wanted to argue further, I shut my mouth and meditated on the goddess’s words. Many had petitioned Mictlantecuhtli for access to the lower depths of the Underworld. Many were granted passage, although he probably asked the impossible of them too. I recalled the old tales. The gods are bound by their word and can be tricked. When the God-in-Spirit Quetzalcoatl descended into the Underworld, Mictlantecuhtli asked him to play a song on a shell instrument. Quetzalcoatl realized the instrument given had no holes in it, so he had worms dig a few and played a tune. Even if I had been willing to kill all life on earth, there was no way I could gather an ocean's worth of blood in a year’s time. There had to be a clever way to fulfill Mictlantecuhtli’s request to the letter. I just needed to find it. “You are free to wander Mictlan as you wish, though you would be wise not to come back to my king without payment,” Queen Mictecacihuatl said. “You must, however, follow our rules. The word of Mictlantecuhtli is law, as is mine. Do not enter a home uninvited. Do not bring violence to the dead. Do not take anything that is not offered, and do not impede our servants.” I memorized each law. They sounded quite fair. Respect the city’s rulers; do not steal; do not intrude; do not harm; do not cause trouble. “I shall not disturb Mictlan’s peace, oh great queen.” “I hope not, for your punishment would be swift.” Queen Mictecacihuatl stopped in front of me, her hands joined together. “You wish to discuss a trade with me.” She knew mortals all too well. “Oh great lady, you know my quest is righteous,” I said. “I please beseech thee to teach me the Doll spell so that I might use its power against the Nightlords who would enslave my soul.” “The Doll spell?” The Queen of the Dead stroked her skeletal chin. “It is true that I have taught a few sorcerers this discipline in the past, for I invented it. But do you understand what you are asking?” I shook my head. “My predecessors told me you could teach me this magic, nothing more.” “You would open a door without knowing where it led?” Mictecacihuatl waved a hand at me. Immediately, the power of her mind moved my left arm against my will until I imitated her movements perfectly. “See for yourself.” “So this is it…” I muttered. “The spell grants control over another’s body.” “Indeed,” the queen confirmed before releasing my arm. “The Doll spell allows one to manipulate the bones and flesh of another. Such knowledge is not bestowed lightly. My last student won my kindness with sweet promises, and when she had no more use for me, she turned my own gift against my subjects.” Mictecacihuatl lowered her head to better look into my eyes. “Why should I bestow it on you, Iztac?” We had entered the negotiation phase. “I will swear an oath not to use that knowledge for evil, if I must.” “There is no good or evil, Iztac, only that which mortals believe in,” Mictecacihuatl replied with a kind tone, as if talking to a child in need of guidance. “The chains binding your life-fire are proof enough of your torment. You have my sympathy, but sympathy cannot purchase power. Especially power fraught with the potential for abuse.” “I understand that to receive, I must give,” I repeated. “Your husband asked for a tribute in exchange for his favor. I am willing to trade another for yours.” Mictecacihuatl nodded. “You have returned two lost souls to my halls, where they belong, and in return, I bestowed on you a boon. You received the audience you sought and a way forward. This is the way of the gods. I will not ask for an ocean of blood in return for my magic, if that worries you, but I must request a service in return.” “Do you want me to scour the Underworld for the lost dead then?” I proposed. Rescuing people in need was a task I could accomplish with pride. “How many would you require?” “You are sweet, Iztac, but any of my servants can accomplish such a task. There is a thing I want that only a Tlacatecolotl can deliver, however.” Mictecacihuatl wistfully glanced at the purple sky, as if she could peer through the Underworld’s ceiling. “Whereas my husband was born dead and cold, I was once alive and warm. My time above was short, but I remember it vividly, like a pleasant dream full of laughs and light.” “I’ve heard stories that you were born human,” I recounted. “That you were sacrificed as an infant and raised in the Underworld.” “I was the first woman to ever die before her time; that much is true,” the queen replied. “In spite of my power and position, I would give away a great many things to feel alive again. So would many of my subjects.” “Do you want a taste of life?” I raised an arm, the one Xolotl hadn’t bitten. “I offered your servant my blood and flesh. I can do the same with you.” “I want far more than a taste, Iztac. Those who came before you already offered that much and more. Scraps of life no longer satisfy me.” A black tongue slithered between Mictecacihuatl’s teeth, licking lips that no longer existed. “I want a feast.” “A… feast?” “A feast upstairs, among the living,” Mictecacihuatl explained calmly. “A night of life that will let me satisfy my cravings.” “You wish to enter the waking world?” Both she and her husband explicitly told me they had no sway over the realm of the living. “Is that even possible?” “Yes, with a Tlacatecolotl’s assistance and the proper rites.” Queen Mictecacihuatl whistled to herself, suddenly enthusiastic. “There is a day of the year when those who are gone can walk the world of the living. The Day of the Dead.” “The Day of the Dead?” I repeated. “I’ve never heard of it, Your Majesty.” “The Nightlords suppressed knowledge of this festival because they fear my power,” Queen Mictecacihuatl explained, her voice brimming with disdain. “And because they feared what the dead had to say.” My fists clenched in anger. The Nightlords silenced the ghosts of their victims so they couldn’t tell their victims what happened on the other side… that their so-called goddesses were false. “Your captors do more than steal blood from the living, Iztac. They steal faith from the true gods too.” Queen Mictecacihuatl waved a hand at her city. “Each newcomer knows less about the world than those who came before them. In time, they will ensure that even my husband’s name is forgotten.” “There will come a time when the Nightlords will be the world’s only gods,” I guessed. It would take them centuries to crush all nations and erase the truth from the living’s memories, but what were centuries to immortal parasites? “How can I ensure this does not come to pass?” “The Day of the Dead rite lets me possess a priestess for a night and gives temporary substance to the guests I bring from the Underworld,” the goddess explained. “The dead will be able to partake in the pleasures lost to them until dawn rises.” “Can these reborn dead make war?” I asked, immediately seeing an opportunity. The Nightlords had killed so many that the Underworld had to abound with their vengeful victims. “You wish to raise an army of ghosts and sweep over the Nightlords.” To my annoyance, Queen Mictecacihuatl shook her head and denied my request. “I must refuse, Iztac. The Day of the Dead is meant to bring joy to the dead and let them reconnect with the living, not satisfy old grudges.” “What greater pleasure is there than taking vengeance on one’s enemies?” I asked in frustration. “Reconnecting with one’s family,” Queen Mictecacihuatl replied calmly. “Dancing under the moonlight, gorging oneself on sweet food, kissing a loved one… Vengeance does not bring joy; it only soothes the pain.” I disagreed from the bottom of my heart, but the goddess would not budge. “Then will you be able to assist me in my battle, Your Majesty? If you can personally manifest upstairs in your full glory…” “If only, Iztac.” Queen Mictecacihuatl let out a sorrowful sigh. “Unfortunately, my power is tied to the Underworld. This rite is only possible because I was mortal once. All I can do is run the festival until its conclusion.” Why were the few kind souls willing to help me powerless to do so? Because justice did not spin the wheel of fate, I suppose. Queen Mictecacihuatl noticed my disappointment and kindly reassured me. “I will try to help you in any way I can,” she promised. “Vampires deny my beloved humans their rest. My king does not care much, but I do.” At least she offered me her assistance. I couldn’t spit on her mercy. “When must I hold the festival, Your Majesty?” “Thirty days before the winter solstice.” “In eleven months, then,” I counted. “I would rather practice the spell before that deadline if possible, Your Majesty.” “We shall make a pact then,” the queen proposed. “I will let you use the Doll spell so long as you vow to organize this festival. If you fail to make progress or do not deliver on your promise, I shall take the power away from you. If you successfully organize the feast, though, the magic shall be yours for another year until the next Day of the Dead, and so on.” The offer sounded fair enough. It would let me use her magic for the year until the festival, after which completion meant I would keep it for the winter solstice, when the Nightlords intended to sacrifice me. Failure to deliver would leave me toothless on that date, however. “You said you needed a living host.” The wording bothered me. “How would that work? Do you require a tribute?” “A living woman must willingly swear their soul to me, allowing me to possess her until the night ends,” Queen Mictecacihuatl explained with eerie calmness, as if we discussed her wardrobe. “Worry not, she will remain unharmed, and I shall return her life to her once dawn rises.” “But it has to be a woman, and she has to accept out of her own volition,” I pointed out. “Indeed. I also require a healthy host.” The goddess chuckled melodiously. “I intend to amuse myself too.” I guessed I would too, if I was only allowed to have flesh once a year. Still, it meant I had eleven months to find someone willing to become a death goddess’s vessel for a night and keep it secret from the Nightlords. A difficult task, but not as hard as gathering an ocean of blood. “Very well, oh Great Queen of the Dead,” I said. “I agree to your terms, and I swear I shall not use your knowledge to bring harm upon your subjects. I will organize your festival.” “Wonderful.” Mictecacihuatl raised a hand and bit into her skinless flesh. “Now, expose your Teyolia to me.” I revealed my bare chest and the flames between my ribs. Like Xolotl before her, Mictecacihuatl let a drop of her divine, blackened blood fall through the cracks. The purple fire within me devoured it utterly. As it did so, a strange warmth coursed through my bones, a gentle caress that reminded me of the times when my father cared for me in my childhood. “Thank you, Your Majesty,” I said. “I shall not disappoint you.” “I believe you,” the queen replied with enthusiasm. “Our pact is sealed. Before we begin, was there anything else you sought to accomplish in my city?” I nodded in confirmation. “My predecessors suggested I find the sorcerer Huehuecoyotl to learn the Veil spell.” “That scoundrel?” Queen Mictecacihuatl scoffed in disdain. Clearly, she didn’t like him. “You might be able to find him causing mischief in the Market of Years… However, I doubt you will have the time to haggle with him. The sun will soon rise in the waking world.” I bristled at her words, though I expected as much. The journey to Mictlan had taken a long time. Xolotl himself doubted I could make the journey in a single night. “My predecessors said I could return to your kingdom the next night, skipping the journey.” “You should, yes.” Queen Mictecacihuatl nodded in confirmation. “Let us use what little time you have left for a lesson in magic.” I bowed before the goddess, as I did before teachers at school. “I am ready to learn.” “So diligent.” The queen’s exposed teeth morphed into a smile. “The Doll discipline requires the use of your Tonalli, Iztac. You must send it out of your body to possess a target, living or dead.” “Like Spiritual Manifestation?” I asked with a frown. “Wouldn’t that cause me to fall unconscious?” “Not necessarily. Possessing another will require far less power than physically manifesting your Tonalli outside your body.” The queen chuckled lightly. “You are your own Tonalli in the Underworld, but you do not see me entering your flesh, do you? Focus on my hand.” The goddess raised a finger at my face. I squinted as I noticed simmering, near-tendrils extended from her bones and coiling around my hand like a black serpent. “Mayhaps I should put it like this: you must sink your Tonalli’s talons into a prey and catch it.” Once the tendril seized my hand, the queen pulled her finger and my limb along with it. “You temporarily and spiritually dominate your target, asserting ownership over their body if you triumph in a battle of will.” “Why can I see it this time?” I muttered in amazement. “Because I wish you to, Iztac,” Queen Mictecacihuatl answered. “Good sorcerers use the Veil spell, which creates illusions, to hide the strings from other magical beings.” “Wait, you know how to cast the Veil?” I beat myself. Of course a goddess would know more than one spell. “Can you teach me?” “I must confess that for all his faults, Huehuecoyotl’s mastery of illusions surpasses mine,” the queen replied. “I can teach you the basics for a price, but if you truly wish to learn from the best… I would go to him.” I had to admit, I did not expect such humility from a goddess. Huehuecoyotl’s craft must truly be great to earn such praise. “Manipulating a target’s limbs is but the most basic application of the Doll spell. Empty corpses have no soul to fight you with, so you can learn to control them easily enough—even more than one.” Mictecacihuatl chuckled to herself. “I remember one sorcerer who used the Doll spell to raise an army of corpses to defend his city from invaders a long, long time ago.” The idea of besieging the Blood Pyramid with an army made of undead sacrifices appealed to me. The more I learned about this Doll spell, the more excited I became. “So…” I raised a hand too. “I must only manifest part of my Tonalli?” “Yes. Instead of expelling it from your body, you must create a link between the target’s and your own. Do not give it substance. Keep it ethereal.” I focused on my finger and summoned the flow of magic coursing through my veins. The same power that allowed me to transform into a giant owl activated. It became a struggle against the instinct to fully manifest it. My magic instinctively either desired to remain in my body or escape it; keeping it in an intermediary state required far more concentration than the previous two options. But I was studious and determined. After three attempts, I finally managed to manifest a puppet string of my own—a shadowy, clawed wisp flowing out of my finger. A talon of darkness. I woke up midway through the lesson. The Doll spell proved less mentally taxing than Spiritual Manifestation and awfully more delicate. Whereas fully summoning my Tonalli demanded great spiritual power, manipulating limbs demanded razor-sharp focus and concentration. Finesse over strength. Queen Mictecacihuatl was a kind, patient teacher, so I knew I would make steady progress over time. However, since magical creatures like the Nightlords could detect undisguised use of magic, I couldn’t afford to practice it in the living world. I needed to learn how to cast the Veil spell as soon as possible. I woke up with heavy eyelids. The dawn hadn’t fully risen yet, and the obsidian windows dimmed its light anyway. My royal chambers were trapped in an eternal twilight at the best of times. I opened my eyes to find Eztli gone from my bed and staring at the window. She stood in front of the obsidian, her back turned on me, the filtered sunlight reflecting on her pale skin and perfect curves. If she heard me wake up, she did not show it. Instead, she stared at the obscured sun with intensity. “Eztli?” I called out to her. She peeked over her shoulder with a look of immense sadness. It only lasted a fleeting instant, but I knew I would remember that face forever. Those hollow, lifeless eyes; that somber scowl of deep unhappiness; her skin turned pallid by despair. If despair had taken physical form, then its avatar stood before me. That single sight unsettled me more than all of the Underworld’s trials combined. Eztli quickly put on a smile and a mask of happiness. “Did you have a nightmare, Iztac?” she asked me. “I watched you sleep. It didn’t look so peaceful to me.” My hand instinctively covered the eye that the spider-monster had taken from me in the swamps. Though the goddess healed me, I had spent most of the night without one. Eztli would have noticed its absence, but she did not. Which meant that the wounds of the soul did not translate to the body. “Do you still dream, Eztli?” Eztli’s smile faltered. “No. I can only see darkness when I close my eyes.” And from her tone, it frightened her. “Eztli… Are you well?” “I’m fine.” Eztli rejoined me in bed. “The dark makes me appreciate my waking moments all the more.” “But—” “I’m fine.” A lie, but she didn’t want to speak of her sorrow. I wasn’t the only one mourning her loss of humanity. Eztli leaned against me, and though she felt like a corpse to the touch, it did not occur to me to turn her away. I held her in my arms and let her rest her head against my chest. She closed her eyes, her ear against my ribs. She was listening to my heart, since her own no longer beat. It finally hit me. We were married. Our wedding involved human sacrifices and our honeymoon a murder, but Eztli was my wife now. We had made love, and only our promised death would separate us. This would have been a dream come true once. Why did it feel so bittersweet then? Because we had paid a heavy price for it. Eztli remained Yoloxochitl’s slave the same way I belonged to the four Nightlords. Although I knew we would make the most of it, we had been forced into this relationship, and it would end along with our lives when our so-called “masters” demanded it. We were married, but not free. For now. “Something changed while you slept,” Eztli whispered. “Your heartbeat is stronger than before.” I would have loved to tell her how I triumphed over a monster and earned a goddess’s favor. She had been my most genuine confidant once, the only one I could spill my secrets to. Instead, I held my tongue. The Parliament of Skulls warned me sternly enough. So long as Yoloxochitl haunted the world, Eztli would remain bound to her will. I hated to keep things from her, but I had to. Once I killed Yoloxochitl, I could let these walls between us fall. “You did make a man out of me,” I said, deflecting. “That was just the start.” Eztli looked at me with an enigmatic smile. “I have so many ideas.” Eztli leaned into my ear to whisper in it. However, instead of promising pleasure, she offered a warning. “I’ve looked around,” she said. “There are holes in the walls for spies to listen in.” It didn’t even surprise me. Still, the thought of some pervert vampire spawn listening while Eztli and I made love filled me with disgust. “But they can’t hear us whisper in the bed.” Eztli gently stroked my hair. “The gardens and the menagerie should be safe too. There are no holes for rats to crawl into, trees for walls, and the open sky for a ceiling.” That was good to know. I moved my lips closer to her ear, as if to kiss her. “Can you search for secret passages?” I whispered so quietly that I doubted anyone could hear us. “Find other hideouts?” “See? You have a mischievous side to yourself, Iztac.” Eztli lightly kissed me on the cheek. “I’ll find a place to dump the bodies too.” Her joking tone could not hide her bloodlust. To hear such words from a woman who had once been so gentle sent a shiver down my spine. Eztli was still in there, but she had changed for the worse nonetheless. I doubted Mictecacihuatl would accept her as a host for the Day of the Dead either. I had so many ideas to subvert the Nightlords’ rule, so many plans to destroy them… and I couldn’t share a single one with her. And she understood it too. “I know you can’t tell me anything,” Eztli whispered. “If Yoloxochitl interrogates me, I will have to answer. I can feel it in my bones.” I held my tongue and nodded. “But she’s mad and desperate to be loved.” Eztli stroked my hair. “I can handle her, at least for a time. I’ll play the perfect daughter. If I find her weakness, I’ll tell you. Things will be simpler when she’s gone. The others can’t compel me the way she can.” At least we thought along the same lines. “You’ll have to be subtler from now on,” I whispered. “We’re walking on eggshells. A single mistake will spell our demise.” “I understand. I just wanted you to know I’m on your side, Iztac. No matter what comes.” Her lips briefly brushed against mine. The kiss was cold, but comforting nonetheless. “No need to tell me anything sensitive from now on. Ask me anything, and I will deliver.” “Thank you.” I embraced her tightly. “The same goes for me.” My stomach growled. The night had made me hungry. “We might be better off eating separately,” Eztli said with a chuckle. “I need to work on my table manners.” My stomach soured. “Eztli… Where does the blood you drink come from?” “I don’t know.” She shrugged. “The old bats’ servants preserve that sweet nectar in jugs spiced with herbs. I’ll investigate during the day.” The red-eyed priests sacrificed tens of thousands on the eve of the Scarlet Moon. I figured they stocked the blood they harvested for the year to feed the vampiric nobility. In the end, neither of us had to leave the bed at all. A single servant entered the royal bedchambers to bring us breakfast—a half-naked woman with a foul scowl all over her face and carrying a platter full of food. Necahual. I almost didn’t recognize her until I met her hateful glare. For a start, she was naked from the waist up, with a single maguey fiber skirt and rope to cover her lady parts. A choker necklace of colorful fabric coiled around her throat. Servants applied avocado oil to give her long black hair a shiny look and a watery, herbal preparation to soften her skin and remove her wrinkles. Her full breasts lay exposed for the world to see, alongside her mature curves and hips. I’d occasionally seen her naked when she bathed in the river, but imperial skincare seemed to have given her back five years of life. So many emotions flashed on Necahual’s face. Shame at being reduced to such a state; relief at seeing her daughter again; rage at seeing me naked and in bed with her; sorrow; and most of all, abject fear. I was slightly ashamed to admit it, but after suffering so many insults and abuse at her hand and seeing that wicked woman forced to serve me filled me with indescribable pleasure. The glare she sent only warmed my heart further. Her cheeks reddened in humiliation when my eyes lingered on her breasts and hips. It was quite a pleasant show. But then my eyes focused on the choker around her neck and all that it symbolized. She was a slave. My slave. My property. My concubine. I could rape her, beat her, torture her, or kill her, and no one would bat an eyelash. She was a toy the emperor could dispose of at will. The Nightlords murdered her husband and then put her in my bed as a final humiliation. And no matter how much I disliked Necahual, that just wasn’t right. Eztli’s lips stretched in a warm, oh-so-familiar smile. “Mother.” “Eztli.” In spite of her fear, Necahual greeted her daughter kindly. Her joy, however, faded away when it came to greeting me. “Cur—my emperor.” Even after saving her from a fate worse than death, she almost insulted me on the spot. I supposed old habits die hard, but her utter ungratefulness did her no credit. “You have come to bring us food, I see,” I taunted her. “Enjoying yourself?” Necahual’s scowl deepened, her hands shaking as they gripped the platter. “Do you want me to put it on the table or… elsewhere?” I knew it was petty and that I should try to win her favor, but I simply couldn’t resist tormenting her. For the first time since I put on the crown, I relished playing emperor. “What do you think, Eztli?” I asked while putting a loving hand around my wife’s waist, making sure Necahual would see everything. “Should she feed us in bed?” I would have sold my hands and feet for a painting of Necahual’s face at that very moment. “Iztac,” Eztli scolded me. “I know the two of you don’t get along, but you should try to make up.” She turned to her mother with a grin. “Put the platter aside and join us, Mom.” “Join us?” I asked with a frown. “In the bed.” Eztli chuckled. “Have you seen how large it is? Besides, it’s comfortable.” Necahual appeared no more eager at the thought than I was, but the chance of talking to her daughter again proved too much for her. After a brief moment of hesitation, Eztli’s smile convinced her to try. My mother-in-law put down the platter of food—which included a goblet full of herb-spiced blood—and warily sat on the bed. Necahual stayed as far away from me as she could and as close to her daughter as decency would allow. She locked eyes with Eztli, chewing her lip, yet failed to utter a single word. “What’s wrong, Mother?” Eztli smiled warmly. “It’s just me.” Necahual clearly wanted to believe it too, but she had seen Eztli consume her father to death. “Are…” she cleared her throat and struggled to find her words. “Are they… treating you well?” She’s afraid of mentioning what happened that night, I guess. Necahual couldn’t entirely hide the dread in her eyes. Does she think she’s next on the menu if she answers incorrectly? “I like it here,” Eztli replied with a chuckle. “I have my own apartment and servants.” “They…” Necahual gulped. “I have a room too. One bigger than our house.” A poor trade-off for her enslavement and widowing. “Oh? I will visit you shortly then.” Eztli charmingly stroked Necahual’s hair. “Is that avocado? You smell wonderful, Mother. Do you remember all the times I pestered you to take better care of yourself?” Necahual’s fear vanished ever so slightly. “I remember.” “You should see the hot baths they put in my room.” Eztli chuckled. “They put perfumed salts in the water, which I find relaxing.” I said nothing and watched Eztli work her magic. That girl could charm her way out of anything. She managed to draw a reassured smile from her mother, even after she watched her drink Guatemoc to death. “I should go now.” Eztli soundlessly leaped out of bed and grabbed the dress she left on the floor yesterday. “I’ll let the two of you enjoy your breakfast and catch up.” “Conspire away,” she meant. The less I know of your plans, the better. Necahual’s jaws clenched into a scowl. “You’re leaving me with him?” I could trust Necahual to make the word sound like an insult. Eztli simply shrugged. “I’m exhausted after last night’s performance, but Iztac still has energy to spend,” she said. “He’ll take good care of you.” I could have sworn that my heart and Necahual’s both stopped at the exact same moment. Eztli exploded in good-natured laughter, one that sounded all the more unsettling in its innocence. “Don’t tell me you’ve never considered it?” No, I did not. “Eztli,” I rasped, struggling to hide my disgust. “I think you’re imagining things.” “My, you would make both your lives so much easier if you could simply bury the hatchet and enjoy each other’s company.” Eztli rolled her eyes as if we were the mad ones and put on her clothes. “Besides, you will have to do it eventually for Mother’s safety. The quicker, the better.” Necahual paled like a ghost while I clenched my fists. “What do you mean, the quicker, the better?” I asked, trying to stay vague in case anyone listened in. Eztli’s playful gaze hardened into a serious expression. “The Nightlords only let Mother live on the condition she would have your child. If Mother fails to conceive, they will kill her.” A tense silence fell upon the royal bedchambers, which Eztli swiftly broke. “No pressure though,” she said as she swiped the goblet of blood from the food platter. “Take it slow if you feel overwhelmed. We’re family, after all. We should learn to get along.” Eztli exited the room afterward, leaving me alone with her mother. Drops of a warm liquid fell on the bed. I looked up at Necahual and found her holding back tears. She looked at me not with hatred but with something deeper, more primal. The same terror we both experienced on that horrifying night. I saved her life from Yoloxochitl’s claws by adding her to my harem. I never intended to do anything about it, but… neither the Nightlord nor Necahual knew that. My mother-in-law believed me to be a monster and a witch’s son, who hated her as much as she hated me. She walked into this room expecting the worst. A small part of my soul still wanted revenge for all that she had done, but the rest of me felt pity for all that she had gone through. I tried to come up with comforting words and failed. Instead, I hugged her. Necahual was as surprised as I was when my arms coiled around her back. I held her against my chest, not in a lover’s embrace, but a gentler one. The kind Eztli used to give me back when we were kids. The kind that said I did not expect anything in return. Necahual froze a few seconds, unsure how to respond, so I reassured her. “It’s all right,” I whispered, gently stroking her hair. “It’s all right. You’re safe.” Necahual started sobbing on my shoulder. Her arms coiled around my back too, the way a drowning sailor would desperately grab a piece of drifting wood. She almost squeezed the air out of my lungs. Her heart pounded in her chest like a war drum. I let her cry in peace without another word. I simply held her. In that moment, I briefly forgot all the insults, all the stoning, and all the wrongs she had inflicted upon me. Eztli meant well when she left us alone, but she was too broken inside to fully comprehend the situation. She was correct on one point, however. As fellow victims of the Nightlords, Necahual and I should learn to get along. Once she calmed down slightly, I approached my lips to her ear and whispered into it. “Do you want revenge?” Necahual held her breath. Her arms tightened further around my back. “Against the Nightlords?” I asked as lowly as I could. “Tlacaelel? The red-eyes? Do you hate them for what they did to you? Do you want them to suffer like I do?” After a moment’s hesitation, Necahual glanced at the door that her daughter had walked through not so long ago. “Yes,” she whispered back, wiping away her tears with a hand. “Yes… I do.” The word dripped with so much venom that I had no trouble believing her. The only things stronger than fear were love and hate. My mother-in-law wasn’t stupid either. Since she whispered her answer instead of saying it out loud, it meant she understood that others listened in. “Can you brew poison with the right herbs? The kind that won’t be detected easily?” I muttered in her ear. Necahual raised her chin in response, which I took for a yes. “Good.” I pushed her back slightly. Necahual’s eyes were almost as red as her daughter’s from all the tears, but she had regained some of her composure. “There is a garden outside, full of medicinal herbs,” I said out loud. Too much whispering might appear suspicious. “You remember the slumber draught you used to brew for me when I couldn’t sleep?” Necahual scowled, her eyes squinting dangerously. She had caught on to my plan. “Would you like me to make more for you?” “Yes, I’ve been struggling with nightmares lately.” In my case, a better quality of sleep could mean the difference between life and death down the line. “How about we spend the afternoon in the garden, once my meetings have concluded?” “I…” Necahual cleared her throat. “I would love to… my emperor.” The pact was sealed. I had recruited my first conspirator. part0013. 8MARCHING FOR WAR Having soothed Necahual, I visited the reliquary for my “morning meditation.” The Parliament of Skulls awaited me inside, shrouded in shadows. “We see you, our successor.” A spectral glow illuminated a thousand empty eye sockets with palpable excitement. “We congratulate you on your successful voyage to Mictlan. Since you returned with your wits intact, we deduce that you have earned Mictantecuhtli’s favor?” “‘Deduce,’ my predecessors?” The choice of words intrigued me. “I thought that you could see and listen through me?” “The Nightlords deprived us of our afterlife.” The skulls expressed their irritation in a collective grunt. “Whatever transpires within Mictlan’s walls remains concealed from our senses. We saw Mictecacihuatl guide you beyond the murals, and then… all became silent and dark.” Intriguing. It was not my intention to withhold secrets from the previous emperors, yet this revealed their powers’ limitations within the Underworld. Some locations could prohibit them from offering their wisdom and guidance. I recounted my journey, which brought them much delight. “Forming an alliance with Mictecacihuatl will yield many benefits,” they mused once my recount was complete. “The Day of the Dead was widely observed by the tribes that existed before Yohuachanca, primarily as mundane festivals celebrating the deceased. Mictecacihuatl can only inhabit a single priestess at a time, hence her presence at a feast was considered an honor.” “So the Day of the Dead ritual is a localized, small-scale event,” I inferred. “Does the ritual have a restricted radius? How do spirits manifest on earth?” “As far as we know, the ritual revolves around Mictecacihuatl’s host. We are unaware of its reach, but the eldest among us remember apparitions rising from their graves at twilight and returning to their tombs at dawn.” The skulls rattled in frustration. “You need not worry about betrayal, but do not expect assistance either. If Mictecacihuatl could exploit the Day of the Dead to wage war against the Nightlords, she would have done so when they massacred her priestesses in Yohuachanca’s early nights.” Mictecacihuatl told me as much. How unfortunate. “What do you propose then, my predecessors? Should I revive the festival publicly?” “The Nightlords remember the Day of the Dead. It would be prudent to orchestrate this divine feast covertly and far away from our captors’ scrutiny.” The Parliament paused momentarily, its members engrossed in deep contemplation. “However…” “Yes?” “Although the Day of the Dead will raise no army, we can still exploit it,” the Parliament suggested. “Certain rituals cannot be done by a solitary sorcerer. If you can locate the remains of ancient magicians and have the goddess resurrect them, even for a night… they might assist you in casting spells currently beyond your reach.” “Like other Nahualli?” True, perhaps I had been considering the festival from the wrong perspective. I didn’t need an army when a small coterie of magicians could achieve similar outcomes. Queen Mictecacihuatl did mention that a past sorcerer had once raised an undead army on his lonesome... “What kind of spells do you have in mind, my predecessors?” “This is but a fleeting thought of ours,” the Parliament replied. “We ought to reflect on our options more carefully.” Given that the Day of the Dead would not take place until next year’s winter, we could afford to think over our strategy for a while. However, another pressing issue with a far more immediate deadline gnawed at my thoughts. “What about the ten thousand sacrifices?” My spine trembled under the weight of such a horrendous blood toll. “You have made your position clear, my predecessors, but for once I struggle to accept your advice.” “Your feelings cloud your mind to the truth,” the Parliament retorted, their collective voices exhaling a unified sigh. “The Nightlords will claim their tribute regardless of your wishes. As it stands, the only decision within your power is the victims’ selection.” I mulled over the old emperors’ words. Unfortunately, I could do little to stop the Nightlords until I gained enough magical power to drag them off their thrones. These false goddesses and their spawn would indiscriminately prey upon Yohuachanca’s citizens unless I offered them victims personally. Much like Chikal before me, I could only spare my fellow man by designating other offerings in their place. I felt little loyalty for the people of Yohuachanca’s capital—not after how easily they dismissed my predecessor’s death before throwing me to the wolves—and I couldn’t name a single person outside the palace’s walls that I wanted to keep alive. Even so, millions of people called the empire their home. Millions who had done nothing to me. The thought of becoming complicit in their murders horrified me. And considering how the tribute system was set up, most victims would come from freshly conquered provinces that had already suffered greatly. Raiding neighboring lands would only spread the pain outward to innocents beyond the border—people who could treat Nahualli like me better than the empire for all I knew. What a gruesome choice to make. No wonder Chikal betrayed her tribe’s sister city. All my options are dreadful. Perhaps my thinking was flawed. If I couldn’t halt the tribute, then perhaps I should increase its cost. I needed to find a target that would both fight back and spread turmoil throughout Yohuachanca. “Speaking of blood,” the Parliament murmured. “The only blood one might find in the Land of the Dead Suns is that shed by a god or a Tlacatecolotl. They are too few in the Underworld to fill a lake, let alone an ocean.” “Mictantecuhtli undoubtedly intends for me to fail,” I replied. “My task is to fulfill the letter of the request, not its spirit.” “The trickster Huehuecoyotl might aid you in your endeavor. He takes delight in making fools of the powerful.” This suggestion only reinforced my resolve to seek him out the following night. With any luck, I could persuade him to support my cause. The collective gaze of my predecessors dimmed in the darkness. “Are you sure that you can trust this Necahual?” “I trust her spite.” My mother-in-law was quite capable of holding a grudge. I learned it at my expense. “I don't plan to divulge my secrets to her, but I do intend to test her loyalty. She can assist me in poisoning Tlacaelel.” To my astonishment, the former emperors barely reacted to the proposal. “We pray your trust is not misplaced. Discovery could lead to dire consequences for your accomplice.” “I must confess my confusion,” I admitted. “I expected you to try to dissuade me.” “Tlacaelel’s elimination will change little, and we doubt the Nightlords will even investigate his death. He is a disposable underling, with a legion of hungry upstarts eager to replace him.” Whether or not killing the eunuch would disrupt the imperial administration didn't concern me. Tlacaelel smiled at the sight of Eztli murdering her father. The thought of ending his life would bring a smile to my face and a measure of retribution to Guatemoc. I owed him that. “However, we applaud your initiative,” the skulls said in a tone laced with satisfaction. “Every bird must hone his talons for the hunt, and Tlacaelel presents an accessible target. Practicing assassinations will prove invaluable when the time comes to target better protected opponents.” I nodded resolutely. “He will be the first to die, but far from the last.” “Yes.” The Parliament's thousand eyes flickered in the darkness. “Heed our words, our successor. Over the centuries, we have discerned that the Blood Pyramid is supported by four pillars. Each must be toppled for the empire to crumble.” I grounded myself and listened intently. “The Nightkin nobility governs in the Nightlords’ stead,” the Parliament explained. “Their red-eyed priests uphold the realm’s societal harmony. The military sows fear among their enemies both within and beyond the borders. And the tributary system funds them all. To bring down Yohuachanca, you must dismantle all four of these pillars. Should you succeed, you will find the Nightlords disoriented, weakened, and exposed.” I had anticipated as much. The Nightlords’ Nightkin offspring ruled the realm's major cities from the shadows, employing the red-eyed priests to impose their will in the daylight. This mirrored my relationship with their masters. Annihilating the priesthood and their vampiric overseers would undoubtedly impair the Nightlords' influence. I could see how undermining the military and tributary systems would sabotage them too. The former held recently subjugated groups in check and deterred foreign enemies from mounting an invasion. Its collapse could spark revolts and invasions, effectively diverting the Nightlords' attention. Meanwhile, the tributary system acted as the empire’s lifeblood while simultaneously depleting the vitality of the newly annexed provinces. As someone who initially intended to become a trader, I was intimately acquainted with its inner workings. Four times a year, the empire demanded a myriad of resources—food, artisanal goods, raw materials, and slaves—from their conquered tributaries. The vanquished were given the choice to fulfill this request either by themselves or by executing raids on foreign tribes to plunder these resources. This practice ensured the empire’s prosperity while simultaneously weakening its tributaries. I pondered the methods by which I could disrupt all four of these pillars. The solution appeared clear to me and equally chilling. “War.” The word reverberated within the reliquary with the weight of a curse. How does such a short word carry so many consequences? “We require a war.” “Yes,” the Parliament confirmed. “The Nightlords’ unquenchable thirst for blood has provided you with the perfect pretext to ignite one. If executed well, you will attain glory, and glory ushers in power. Men worship conquerors. If botched, the conflict would nonetheless weaken the empire.” A war would greatly benefit me on paper. It would drain the military force that enforced the Nightlords' authority, coerce Nightkin and priests into combat where they could be killed, and offer me occasions to leave the palace on military campaigns. Nothing burdened the tribute system more than providing sustenance to an army stationed half a world away. However, Yohuachanca had accumulated its might through victorious military campaigns. Emperors would come and go, but generals retained their positions, sometimes for centuries in the Nightkin’s case. I couldn’t guarantee an expedition’s failure, and subduing a defenseless tribe wouldn’t suffice. I needed a grueling, brutal conflict that would leave Yohuachanca exhausted. Furthermore, war always carried a steep price. Innumerable innocents would suffer, in and out of Yohuachanca’s borders. No entity posed an imminent, life threatening threat to the empire. I would have no justification. My predecessors sensed my internal turmoil and attempted to reassure me. “Should you falter, the Nightlords will continue to torment the world. At the very least, selecting the battlefield will let you manipulate the outcome in your favor.” “That would not absolve me,” I replied, my tone somber. I had witnessed firsthand what awaited the living after death. A treacherous, perilous journey through a wilderness teeming with monstrous creatures, with the only refuge being a city of bones presided over by an indifferent deity. “Hundreds of thousands will perish.” “Ten thousand sacrifices were asked of you. Ten thousand souls doomed to languish within vampire bellies that will find no rest in Mictlan. The Nightlords will make this demand again from your successor. Even if your war results in a hundred thousand deaths, your captors will slay an equivalent number in less than a decade… and their victims will be denied any semblance of peace.” Their rationale was cold and brutal, but not untrue. As a trader, I had been trained to put my faith in numbers over words. This arrangement would be a lesser evil, but it still left a bitter taste in my mouth. “You already tried war, did you not?” I asked the Parliament. “My predecessor was a conqueror. What good did it do?” A skull bulged out of the pillar and took prominence. I immediately recognized the remains of Nochtli the Fourteenth, my predecessor. “I greet thee, my heir,” the skull said. “Yes, I was a conqueror in life. Much like you, I resented becoming emperor and sought to use military might to rebel against the Nightlords. I invaded the south, hoping that successes would purchase my freedom.” “But you failed,” I pointed out. “Through no fault of my own,” the skull rattled. “I have won more battles than the whole number of your years, Iztac. Never once did I know defeat. After I broke Chilam and Balam, half my army believed me invincible. I courted generals to my cause to prepare a coup. Had things gone to plan, I would have been marching on the capital as we speak.” “You found support among the generals?” It surprised me. It was easy to be brave in my situation when I had nothing left to lose, but I would expect imperial soldiers to prove more cautious. “You would be surprised.” Nochtli chuckled sinisterly. “The old resent following orders from immortal leeches who have often never set foot on the battlefield. The young burn with ambition and underestimate vampires. Men are beasts. You cannot beat the hunger out of them.” It reassured me that some men were brave enough to defy the Nightlords, however few. “But why did you fail then?” “The same reason even the best of us failed.” The skull’s eyes flickered. “Magic.” I cursed myself for asking such a stupid question. I should have seen it coming. “I did not wield spells, nor did I enjoy my predecessors’ guidance as you do now,” Nochtli reminded me. “So I tried to assassinate Sugey, the Bird of War. I ambushed her with my best troops in the perfect conditions. I thought she would be like a feathered tyrant—dangerous but beatable. I was wrong. She slaughtered my escort to a man and dragged me back to the capital.” I scratched my neck where the Jaguar Woman once strangled me with the power of her mind. No common warrior could fight back against such artifices. “Since my assassination attempt amused Sugey, I was allowed to wither away in empty luxury instead of suffering torture.” Nocthli concluded his tale with a tired sigh. “But the sisters would not let me out of their sight again. I wallowed in despair until I became a shadow of myself.” “Your efforts won’t be for naught,” I reassured him. “I will pick up where you left off.” “Then you must spread chaos,” Nochtli replied bluntly. “I could not have ambushed Sugey alone without the fog of war blinding her. No amount of soldiers will let you destroy a Nightlord, but the fewer of them shielding the vampires from harm, the easier your task will be.” Another skull bulged toward the forefront of the Parliament to say its piece. “I am Ichnoyotl, the Tormented One,” said one. “I came close to tearing the empire apart, back when it was young. I betrayed Yohuachanca to its enemies, sparking a civil war. The Jaguar Woman broke my body with but a thought and had my own successor sacrifice me on the altar, yet my death purchased a decade of peace for our neighbors.” I remembered his name, for that emperor had been the only one to bear it. His reign was remembered as an age of chaos. which a succession of “good” emperors managed to pull the empire back from. Still, the disaster halted Yohuachanca’s expansion for years. Sabotaging the empire’s military in a pointless campaign might prove disastrous in the short term, but good for the world in the long-term. Even if I failed, I would ease things for those who would try to follow in my wake. “To succeed, I would require an adversary capable of bleeding Yohuachanca dry,” I pointed out. “A formidable adversary that won't hesitate to fight back.” The Parliament’s hundred heads spoke as one once again. “We believe you already have a potential candidate in mind.” Indeed, I knew someone. The only empire that had managed to maintain its pride in the face of Yohuachanca’s dominance. “But would the Nightlords let me wage war on them?” I asked with skepticism. I struggled to imagine the Nightlords agreeing to such a risky gamble. “Not unless you force their hand,” the Parliament conceded. “The Bird of War’s bloodlust might cause her to support your proposal, but her shrewder sisters would overrule her. You must create a convincing pretext or put them in a situation where they must acquiesce to salvage their reputation.” “Do you have a specific scenario in mind?” “Mayhaps.” The skulls emitted a clattering noise. “But we require more information. Chikal was trained to guide you in warfare, and Ingrid’s mother closely monitors such developments for her personal gain. Seek counsel from both of them.” “Understood.” I bowed before my predecessors. “I will collect information and return to you.” “Do not waste time, Iztac. Winter’s end ushers in the campaign season. If you plan to sow seeds for the summer and autumn, the time is now.” An emperor had everything but time. Upon bidding goodbye to my undead advisors, I convened a morning meeting with three of my wives—Eztli would skip it to explore the palace’s secret passages. I instantly noticed Amazons among the guards safeguarding the council room. Although their glances went from cautious to suspicious, the absence of red in their eyes warmed my heart nonetheless. My good mood persisted until I entered the council room and found Tlacaelel conversing with Chikal. He welcomed me with a grin that made me want to puke. “Oh mighty Godspeaker, your presence honors us.” The red-eyed eunuch kneeled in reverence. “I pray the goddesses have imparted their wisdom to you.” I should ship him to the altar this instant. With a quota of ten thousand heads to meet, I had to start somewhere. Regrettably, the Nightlords would likely veto my decision. “They have entrusted me with a mission.” “My lord will certainly excel at fulfilling it,” Ingrid remarked as she bowed before me. While Chikal and Nenetl appeared either stoic or anxious, respectively, Ingrid had come to the meeting wearing a stunning red gown revealing part of her cleavage and an emerald necklace that reflected the green in her eyes. I blushed slightly at her appearance, which, judging by her pleased expression, had been her intention from the state. “We were eagerly waiting for your arrival.” “I apologize for leaving without a word last time,” I said to her and Nenetl. “It was unplanned.” “No worries,” Nenetl reassured me gently. “We... We didn't linger for too long before returning to our quarters.” “We await at your leisure, my lord.” The smile on Ingrid's lips did not reach her eyes. “We understand that duty often calls at inopportune times. The Nightlords and their progeny demand much from all of us.” Their “progeny.” I could read between the lines. Ingrid was aware of what happened with Eztli and was uneasy about it. I briefly thought she was jealous before berating myself over my naïveté. Ingrid didn’t care for me personally, only for what I could do for her family. Eztli unsettles her. She’s worried about what influence she will have over me. How should I handle the situation? Should I assuage Ingrid and try to convince her that Eztli isn’t her enemy? I would rather avoid a festering conflict, especially since we would need to work together to dodge our deaths on the altar. Chikal cleared her throat. “What is the will of the Nightlords, Lord Emperor?” I took my seat at the table. “I must offer them ten thousand sacrifices by the Summer Solstice.” My councilors' reactions told me much about their personalities. Nenetl clasped her mouth in horror, her innocent eyes wide with disbelief. A fleeting look of unease crossed Ingrid’s face, and although she swiftly corrected her expression, her fidgeting fingers gave her true feelings away. Chikal barely reacted, since she probably expected such a demand. Tlacaelel just smiled. I began to wonder if the toad could do anything else. “Procuring ten thousand individuals in half a year is a daunting task,” Chikal remarked. “Only death can pay for life,” Tlacaelel retorted with a hollow pretense of wisdom. “The empire can easily meet the quota if we demand slaves from the provinces as payment.” “But...” Nenetl gulped and failed to complete her sentence. Her eyes glanced in my direction, seemingly seeking permission. “Speak your mind,” I urged her. The more time I spent with her, the more I realized that my fellow Nahualli would rarely confront anyone without encouragement. “Thank you, my lord.” Gathering her courage, Nenetl faced Tlacaelel. “Lord Tlacaelel, the recent celebrations resulted in such a massive loss of blood. The provinces would have to select their own citizens as tributes to fulfill the quota.” Tlacaelel frowned at her in genuine confusion. “What is your point, Lady Nenetl?” Of course, he would opt for the most despicable solution. Emotional appeals wouldn’t affect him, so I didn't even try them. “I would rather claim the blood of my enemies than that of my subjects,” I replied, trying to speak like an emperor—or at least how I imagined one should think. “We have no shortage of the former.” “My lord speaks wisely.” Ingrid nodded in agreement, though I couldn’t tell if she did so to curry favor or out of a genuine desire to avoid sacrificing her countrymen. “Warriors captured fresh from the battlefield make for more illustrious sacrifices than slaves.” “Do you already have a target in mind, Lord Emperor?” Chikal asked with her arms crossed. “Not yet,” I half-lied. A part of me still hoped a better solution would present itself. “I was hoping for your guidance on the matter.” Chikal's nod was curt. “Of course.” I observed in silence as she spread out half a dozen maps across the council table. The largest depicted a significant portion of the known world, including Yohuachanca and its neighboring territories. I immediately noticed three distinct lines of varying colors representing the empire’s ever-expanding borders. Yohuachanca’s growth turned maps obsolete within years of their creation. “As you can see, Lord Emperor, the entire peninsula facing the Boiling Sea, along with its islands, pays you homage,” Chikal explained. “As are all lands bordering the northern borderlands and the southern Amaru Mountains. Your predecessors’ forces have extended southeast of the latter, deep into the jungles.” Her hand drifted south, momentarily pausing when it hovered over two points situated behind a recently drawn line—the cities of Chilam and Balam. I searched her gaze and found only an impenetrable mask. Her emotions eluded me. Now that I had access to high-quality imperial maps, the reasons for the Three-Rivers’ and the Sapa’s survival became apparent—geography. Dry arid lands separated us from most of the Three-Rivers Federation, along with a dozen buffer tribes caught between them and Yohuachanca. As for the Sapa, their empire sprawled across mountainous terrain. Where weapons failed to halt Yohuachanca’s conquests, nature had prevailed. “My suggestion,” Chikal proposed, “is to head north and quell the coastal plain tribes south of the Three-Rivers Federation. The dense jungle enveloping the southeast is sparsely inhabited, and the terrain will impede expansion. That well is dry.” Her recommendation would conveniently keep troops far from her home city, which would be the first to bear the onslaught of any war in the region. I silently analyzed the maps and let my advisors speak their minds. “Many northern tribes joined the Three-Rivers for mutual protection, but not all,” Tlacaelel said. “The stragglers will be easy prey.” “The Three-Rivers won’t remain still as we mobilize troops close to their borders,” Ingrid pointed out. “We should secure a treaty offering guarantees of safety first. Otherwise, they'll intervene militarily.” “Could the Three-Rivers challenge our armies?” I asked, praying for a resounding yes. “Of course not, oh Godspeaker.” Tlacaelel chuckled. “The bison-eaters are a disorganized assembly of tribes with less than a tenth of our population. They are more likely to scatter and retreat than to engage in battle.” Chikal shared his assessment. “While I wouldn't underestimate any adversary, Yohuachanca significantly outstrips the Three-Rivers in wealth, logistical capacity, equipment, and population. They stand no chance of repelling imperial armies if we make a determined push north.” I had hoped for a different answer. “Why have none of my predecessors attempted to conquer them then?” “The terrain and distance, Lord Emperor,” Chikal replied. “The deserts would compel us to take detours, elongate our battle lines, and stretch our logistics thin. As the region lacks any state more stable than tribal confederacies, the northerners do not assemble vast armies like we do. Instead, they employ beasts and small raiding squads to execute surprise assaults, harass troops, feign retreats to set better ambushes... They might lack the numbers to stop our advance, but occupation will prove costly.” “Moreover, the north lacks fertile lands and resources,” Ingrid pointed out. “Most emperors simply didn't see the point in fighting over such lands.” Not when easier prey and wealthier territories lay to the south. “So, in summary, the Three-Rivers can't win a war, but peace is less expensive than conquest?” “If one considers only land and wealth,” Chikal replied with a thin smile. “The calculation changes when it comes to blood.” The Nightlords didn't covet additional patches of land or rivers. They wanted blood. On paper, expanding northward would easily satisfy their demands. A handful of decimated tribes would suffice to meet the quota. Yohuachanca would emerge unscathed, if not stronger. Therefore, I dismissed that option. I looked south of the map and addressed the longneck in the room. “What about the Sapa Empire?” While Chikal looked at me as if I had gone mad, Tlacaelel's smile became strained. “Oh Great Emperor, the Sapa’s insolence offends the goddesses, and their time will come,” the eunuch said. “However, we can find ten thousand tributes closer to home.” “The Sapa Empire is prosperous,” I countered. The stark contrast between their ambassadors and those of the Three-Rivers sprang to mind. The former came adorned in gold, the latter in pelts. “Why not seize their gold along with their blood?” “Because acquiring ten thousand Sapa heads will cost a hundred times that in our people’s blood,” Tlacaelel retorted calmly. “You must consider your loyal subjects’ welfare.” I stared at the bastard in stunned silence, astounded by his sheer audacity. He had managed to utter those words with a straight face five minutes after proposing that we sacrifice ten thousand slaves. Nonetheless, the more Tlacaelel objected to the idea, the more I became convinced that I was on the right track. Chikal said out loud what Tlacaelel wouldn’t dare admit. “The Sapa Empire is no petty tribe, Lord Emperor. They are an empire that extends across countless mountains, boasting formidable armies on par with your own, ample gold to hire mercenaries, magic, and a sizable enough population to sustain a prolonged conflict.” I chuckled. “Chikal, are you suggesting that Yohuachanca might lose?” Chikal took a moment to carefully consider her next words. “If by ‘defeat’ you mean losing territory, Lord Emperor, then no,” she said, her tone that of someone walking on eggshells. “The Sapa won't pursue us beyond their mountains. However, I doubt we will be successful in holding the region, not unless you are prepared to pay a blood tribute a hundred times costlier than what the Nightlords demanded of you. There are superior options available.” “I urge you to heed Lady Chikal’s prudent advice, oh Great Emperor,” Tlacaelel added. “We recognize your desire to chastise the non-believers, but unfortunately, the time has not yet come.” I gazed at the eunuch. His smile had grown so thin that it barely concealed the apprehension and annoyance beneath. Had he discerned the trap I had laid for the Nightlords? I needed to cleverly conceal my motives. “Do you recall what you told me when we first met, Tlacaelel?” I asked him. Tlacaelel frowned in confusion. “I do not, oh Great Emperor.” “You said that my predecessor, Nochtli, left us many legacies.” Tlacaelel would come to rue these words in time. “I have one year to leave Yohuachanca with a legacy that it will never forget. One year to ensure that history remembers my name.” And hopefully as the Nightlord-slayer. “Conquering the Sapa’s mountains would indeed be glorious, oh Godspeaker,” Tlacaelel responded diplomatically. “However, their end will come when the goddesses decide it. Have they asked this of you?” He thought pinching my strings would reel me in. A big mistake. “They haven't forbidden me from anything,” I countered. “My mission is to procure ten thousand sacrifices by any means. How I accomplish that task is up to me.” “Nevertheless, I would recommend seeking counsel with the Gods-in-the-Flesh beforehand,” Tlacaelel urged, his tone soft and smooth. “Only with their divine endorsement can triumph be assured.” Refuting his claim would cast me in a heretic’s light, so I kept my mouth shut. I briefly glanced at my wives to gauge their reactions. Nenetl remained silent, utterly overwhelmed by the situation, while Chikal assessed my proposal with stoicism, but Ingrid’s eyes were bright with satisfaction. I could tell that my ambition intrigued her. “Certainly, Tlacaelel,” I said with false amiability. Just being polite to the toad wore my patience thin. “Chikal?” The Amazonian queen immediately straightened in her seat, like a soldier preparing for the call to arms. “Yes, Lord Emperor?” “I want you to create strategic plans for potential campaigns against both the Three-Rivers Federation and the Sapa Empire,” I instructed her. “I want to evaluate all alternatives.” Another lie, although this one flowed easily enough. I already knew whom to target, but Tlacaelel’s reaction clearly showed that I couldn't declare war against the Sapa without significant preparation. False deliberations would let me buy time. Chikal assented with a nod. “As you wish, Lord Emperor.” Was that a flicker of amusement I detected in her voice? She likely expected me to reconsider upon seeing the colossal task ahead. That poor woman; she would be disappointed. “Nenetl,” I called, catching my fellow Nahualli off-guard. “Y-Yes?” she replied, adjusting her position on the seat. “How… may I assist you?” How should I handle her? My predecessors hinted at a method to awaken her Tonalli, but Nenetl seemed prone to fleeing or withdrawing at the first sign of trouble. Revealing too many secrets to her might prove unwise. I better test her first. “I want to review the empire's current situation with you, particularly the tribute system,” I said. “If I am to preside over Yohuachanca’s destiny, I must understand how it works.” With luck, I might find a flaw to exploit. “My lord's thirst for knowledge honors him,” Ingrid said with approval. “We all stand prepared to assist you in your endeavors.” “I will try not to bore you,” Nenetl replied, a timid smile gracing her lips. “You won't,” I reassured her. I meant to comfort her, but Nenetl’s anxious expression told me that she perceived my words as a veiled threat. What should I have expected? She has been told all her life that she was cursed. In contrast, Ingrid’s bold attempts to curry favor were painfully transparent. “Have you planned any engagements following our meeting, my lord?” she asked me. “I requested the musicians arrange a performance in your honor.” I smiled and tried to let her down gently. “I appreciate your thoughtfulness, Ingrid, but I will spend the afternoon with another.” Her gaze hardened instantly. “Another?” “A concubine gifted to me by Lady Yoloxochitl,” I replied. Although calling Necahual a concubine filled my mouth with a bitter aftertaste, at least it shouldn’t raise too many questions. I was only half-right. Ingrid immediately squinted at me, her jaw clenching. I could tell she desperately wanted to ask for details but held her tongue after I mentioned Yoloxochitl. She glanced at Tlacaelel, whose putrid smirk boiled the blood in my veins. Wait, wait… Eztli said Yoloxochitl was mad and desperate to be loved. Could I play on it to both earn her support in a foolish war and lower her guard? An idea quickly came to mind. One that I loathed, but that would serve my ends well. “I have another mission in mind for you, Ingrid,” I said. “A very important one.” Her annoyed eyes swiftly widened in interest. “A mission?” “Lady Yoloxochitl has been kind to me.” The lie had all the sweetness of rotten fruit. “I would like to thank her with a gift. A monument in her name. As my counselor on cultural matters, I thought you might have an idea.” Ingrid immediately pounced on the opportunity to please me. “How about a statue of her?” “The costlier, the better.” That way, I could strain the empire’s budget too. “A statue of gold with flowers that all would admire.” “I believe I can arrange it,” Ingrid replied with a smile. “I would also like for us to meet with your mother tonight,” I said. The Parliament suggested that I consult Lady Sigrun, and agreeing to Ingrid’s proposal would hopefully placate her. I didn’t need more festering bitterness in my life. “Could you organize a dinner with her?” Now Ingrid’s smile reached all the way to her eyes. She had been waiting forever for me to ask her that. “I would be delighted, my lord.” I hoped her mother would live up to her reputation. part0014. 9HOW TO WIN FRIENDS AND INFLUENCE PEOPLE Nearly six hundred years of endless conquests had refined the empire’s tribute system into a terribly efficient tool of oppression. Nenetl and I spent most of the day reviewing its current state, which proved enlightening. First of all, tributes were divided into fifty administrative provinces, each overseen by an official called a calpixqui. These stewards assessed the economic potential of each region, discussed terms of tribute with various cities, collected them on Yohuachanca’s behalf, kept detailed records, and reported any issue to the central government. Loyal provinces that joined the empire voluntarily obtained deals that were better than those who resisted assimilation. Chilam, for example, only paid a third of what her sister-city Balam was taxed. The calpixqui collected the tributes four times a year, which could take the form of food, crafted goods, or slaves, depending on Yohuachanca’s needs. The bureaucracy’s demands reflected each region’s capabilities. The provinces specialized in agriculture mostly sent maize and cotton, while mining towns sent gold and stone. Once they had collected the tributes, each calpixqui sent the “harvest” back to the capital, where it would be redistributed. Portions went to the emperor, the Nightlords, the military, and the priests, while the rest was stocked for use in times of need. The shares varied depending on circumstances; almost all the food went to the army, the Nightlords and priests kept the jaguar’s share of the human sacrifices, while I kept most of the luxury items. My main role was to impress others with my lavish lifestyle and splendor, after all. If a region failed to deliver the required payment, the assigned calpixqui could requisition it by force with the army’s help. A province would sometimes attempt to rebel over the tribute every few years, but this rarely happened nowadays. Only smoking ruins remained of cities that dared to defy the Nightlords’ demands. Even after reading the tax documents with Nenetl, I struggled to imagine the empire’s wealth. The numbers were so absurd that they formed an abstract picture in my mind. My personal fortune as emperor alone simply boggled the mind. I owned dozens of smaller palaces and villas, entire vaults filled with precious metal, thousands of slaves… I couldn’t see any way to spend all my wealth in a year, let alone bankrupt the empire. A war might strain the tribute system, but it wouldn’t cause it to collapse. The bureaucracy had been purposefully designed to fund endless campaigns. I needed another way to sabotage it. Everything revolves around the calpixqui. These officials kept the river of gold and blood flowing. But even if I were to kill them all, the extensive imperial records would allow the bureaucracy to quickly replace them. All papers and reports are gathered in my palace, however. If I could destroy them at an opportune time, it might disrupt the flow of tributes, at least for a few months… but even then, I’m not sure. Now I understood why the empire could afford a new emperor each year. Its resilient bureaucracy could survive madmen and eccentrics alike. “I’m so sorry,” Nenetl apologized as we finished reviewing the last reports. “It must have been so bothersome.” “No, far from it,” I reassured her. “I appreciate your guidance on this matter. Honestly, I’m amazed by the depth of your knowledge.” “You are too kind, my lord.” Nenetl blushed a bit, something all the more noticeable because of her pale skin. “The priests said I had… an eidetic memory. I will never forget anything.” I believed her. Nenetl had an amazing understanding of the imperial administration, of what each province specialized in, and how much I could ask from them. “Where do you come from?” I asked her. I was curious about what life another Nahualli experienced. “Oh, I was born in Quetzaltenango,” Nenetle explained. “I, uh… I was raised by Lady Ocelocihuatl’s priests.” “The priests?” That was impossible. Red-eyed priests couldn’t have children. The magic that bound them to their Nightlord overlords granted them unnatural youth and vigor but made them sterile to a man. I suspected that was why the Nightlords didn’t turn everyone into red-eyed thralls. Now she was all fidgeting and licking her lips in anxiety. “My father… gave me away to the temple when I was born.” Though I felt sorry for her, it didn’t surprise me much. Many had wondered why my father insisted on raising me; the soothsayer’s prophecy forbade others to murder me, not to give me away to an orphanage. “I… I would have been sacrificed, but the priests decided against it after reading my day signs. I was meant to serve the Gods-in-the-Flesh, they said.” Nenetl smiled shyly. “I guess… they predicted I would be here.” “Mayhaps,” I replied without truly believing it. The way through which the Nightlords selected their sacrifices remained obtuse. Perhaps they did keep a detailed schedule for future victims. “So you’ve never known your parents?” “No, I-I never met them.” Nenetl shook her head meekly. “The priests treated me kindly enough. They didn’t hurt me, unless I… unless I asked stupid things.” As in, they probably did their best to ignore her and just reminded her she was a cursed girl lucky to be alive whenever they remembered her. No wonder she turned out so shy and insecure. With no loving parent to treat her kindly, she had internalized the lies instead of rejecting them. My silence caused her to blush. “How… How was your childhood?” Nenetl dared to ask me, which I took as a good sign. “You mentioned your father…” “My mother abandoned me,” I confessed. Even though she was a Tlacatecolotl herself. “My father raised me alone before he died four years ago from the drought.” “Oh, I’m…” Nenetl cleared her throat. “I’m⁠—” “Don’t say sorry,” I interrupted her. “You don’t need to apologize to me for anything. I won’t punish you for speaking your mind.” “But—” “No buts.” I shrugged. “We’re both cursed children, are we not? That makes us kin.” “I-I see.” Nenetl joined her hands and mulled over my words. Thankfully, it seemed they got through to her. “I’ve… I’ve never met anyone like me before. I’m glad.” She blushed immediately. “I mean, not that you’re like me, but…” “I know what you mean,” I reassured her with a smile on my lips. She sighed in relief. “I-I shouldn’t hold you back any longer, my lord. You wished to spend the afternoon with your, uh, concubine, right?” “You can call me Iztac if you want, Nenetl.” I had the feeling it would be an uphill battle until it stuck. “Perhaps we could spend the afternoon together tomorrow? What do you like to do in your free time?” “The afternoon?” Nenetl held her breath for a second. “You mean… alone?” “Yes,” I replied bluntly, causing her to redden considerably. I suddenly realized how that probably sounded to her. “As friends.” “Yes, uh… I wouldn’t mind, Lord Iztac.” Nenetl sighed in relief. I guessed an official date would put too much pressure on her shoulders. “I… like to play board games. Do you like to play patolli? Or bul?” “I’ve played patolli in the past.” Eztli always beat me at it, though I often won against Guatemoc when he accepted a match. “I’ve never tried to play bul. You could teach me.” “I would love to.” Nenetl beamed like the sun. “So… tomorrow?” “Tomorrow,” I concurred, a strange feeling building up in my stomach. It took me a while to realize why. For the first time in my life, I might have made a friend who wasn’t named Eztli. I still intended to test Nenetl to see if she could become an ally against the Nightlords… but I would have still frequented her for the pleasure of her company. She was right. It was nice to meet a fellow Nahualli. I loved Eztli, but she could never truly understand what I went through all my life. Nenetl might. After leaving Nenetl, Necahual and I spent the afternoon visiting the gardens and menagerie. My mother-in-law came fully clothed this time. The priests saw fit to dress her in a ceremonial huipil blouse streaked with red and white flower motifs, alongside a small crown of feathers and black onyx earrings. She would have looked like a noble lady if not for the choker marking her as my property. Necahual arrived with a basket hanging from her arm, a pestle, a mortar, and an all-too-familiar glare. She welcomed me with stone cold silence. A surge of anger boiled my veins. Though I had comforted her only a few hours ago, it seemed Necahual stubbornly decided to go back to hating me. What did I expect from her? Gratitude? The wind whispered into my ear, “She does feel gratitude, and it disgusts her.” Good. I offered her my arm, which Necahual took for the sake of appearance with a look of visceral humiliation. Her forced reaction filled me with dark glee. After forcing me to behave according to her wishes for years, the roles were now reversed. I found the promenade soothing nonetheless. The gardens breathed life, unlike the Land of the Dead Suns. I had almost missed the breeze blowing on my face. “In the sulfur pits, the darkness burns in exalted hatred,” the wind whispered, “with no one to hear it scream. Almost. I paid close attention to Necahual as we walked among flowers. My mother-in-law appeared genuinely amazed by the sheer variety of plants in the imperial gardens. Her eyes darted from one rare orchid to another, and we had to stop half a dozen times for her to pick them up. “Will that be sufficient?” I whispered into her ear, too low for the guards trailing us to listen. Necahual scowled a bit, as if angry that I dared to breathe on her. “Yes.” “I need something undetectable,” I insisted. “Symptoms that will be overlooked. Too quick a death, and we’ll be suspected.” Necahual glared at me for daring to question her expertise and then looked down on her basket. I glanced at her harvest—a set of plants of various colors, mostly red, alongside a few small grains and moonflowers. “I can make a poison from these,” she whispered back. “Whoever ingests it will feel drowsiness after a few hours. They will suffer from diarrhea, abdominal pain, and then a fatal seizure.” The idea of Tlacaelel shitting himself to death appealed to me. “How long?” “One to two days.” Long enough to avoid suspicion. “The powder is tasteless if put in a drink.” Excellent. I could simply invite Tlacaelel to breakfast and slip it into his cacao drink. “Make only a little. A satchel’s worth I can hide on myself.” Necahual bit her lip in silent anger. “Do not speak to me like that. I am not stupid.” “I will treat you with courtesy when you return the favor.” I sneered at her. “I saved your miserable life, and this is the thanks I get? Silence and glares?” “Thanks?” Her nails sank into my flesh. “It is your fault that Eztli is⁠—” I saw red for a second, my blood boiling in my veins and my fists tightening in rage. Necahual let go of my arm and recoiled away in fear upon my expression. If looks could kill, my glare would have murdered her on the spot. A wiser person would have shut up rather than pushed their luck. Necahual wasn’t one of them. “This is all your fault,” she hissed under her breath. “If you had… If you’d just listened… my husband and my daughter would still be alive.” It took all my willpower not to punch her. Nobody would think twice if I did. But I held back. I was better than that. “The truth cuts deeper than any blade,” the wind gleefully whispered into my ear. “I see why my father chose my mother over you,” I said coldly. Necahual flinched as if I had slapped her. “He deserved better than a small, petty, hateful thing like you,” I taunted her. “You could have never hoped to satisfy him.” Necahual slapped me. Or rather, she tried. I grabbed her wrist before her hand reached anywhere close to my cheek. Necahual struggled against my grip, but much to her surprise, I was both too strong and unwilling to let go. I’d never fought back like this before. Since it was forbidden for anyone to raise their hand against Yohuachanca’s emperor, the guards immediately raised their obsidian clubs to intervene. I raised my hand to stop them in their tracks. “It’s fine.” Using one hand to hold on to Necahual’s wrist, I used the other to grab the back of her head. “It’s part of the fun.” I pressed my lips against her own. I heard Necahual gasp and freeze in shock at the second contact. Her lips tasted different from Eztli; older, warmer, yet full of life. Yet they welcomed me all the same, past the initial shock. I expected her to puke in my face, but instead she closed her eyes and returned the kiss. It… felt surprisingly good, actually. Not because there was any tenderness in this kiss, like with Eztli, but because it tasted of revenge. The soldiers exchanged a silent glance and then took a step back. With no need to maintain the charade, I let go of Necahual. She caught her breath, her eyes wide open in shock. She didn’t know how to react. “Were you imagining my father in my place?” I whispered into her ear. From the tears of rage and humiliation forming in her eyes, I had guessed correctly. “Seems I hit a nerve,” I taunted her. “It must have hurt to see me each morning with my father’s face and my mother’s eyes. Looking at the mirror of your defeat.” “Your mother was a witch,” Necahual hissed through her clenched teeth. “A monster.” “Yet Father didn’t come to you even when she left,” I mocked her. “You hoped he would, didn’t you? Maybe you thought he would elope with you?” “How could…” Necahual’s skin turned paler than a corpse. “You… You are just like her.” I sneered, “Wasn’t that why you tormented me for so long?” Necahual didn’t answer. Another emotion had taken her over, banishing the disgust and anger—overwhelming, abject terror. It only further reduced whatever sympathy I felt for her. She only threw stones at me because she believed she wouldn’t suffer any consequences for it. How brave. “Ask yourself why my father never returned your feelings.” I stared into her eyes and told her the truth she needed to hear. “Maybe he would have if you had stopped being such a bitch.” Then I delivered the killing blow. “A bitch so unbearable,” I said, “that Yoloxochitl ‘adopted’ Eztli because she thought she could be a better mother than you.” At that moment… Necahual became livid, her gaze empty. Something had shattered inside her heart. I put my arm around her own for show. She shivered at my touch but did not push me away. “The only reason I saved you is because of Eztli,” I reminded my mother-in-law. “Never forget it. Never blame me for what happened to her and your late husband ever again. Do you understand me?” Necahual did not argue, nor did she curse me. She simply nodded meekly and followed along. We settled on a tense silence for the rest of the promenade, only broken by the noise of our steps. I knew it might have been wiser to talk to her sweetly, after all I would need her cooperation. However, I didn’t regret a single word I said. They had been years in the making. “Men spin beautiful lies to disguise the ugly truth,” the wind whispered. “To others and, most of all, to themselves. True change cannot happen without pain.” Change? Necahual? I struggled not to laugh. We made our way to a prison within my prison—the menagerie. The zoo was divided into sections meticulously designed for each animal collection that it housed. Beautiful stones adorned the well-crafted enclosures, with lines of text written on them to offer insight into the captive creatures. Aviary cages kept hundreds of brightly colored birds from the southern rainforests captive, singing beautiful songs next to feathered serpents. Swamp-like pits hosted snakes, crocodiles, and centipedes the size of my arm. Pumas, jaguars, coyotes, bisons, and even a sabertooth tiger from the north roamed comfortable spaces, separated from hundreds of workers by barriers of thick wood and bard stone. Apes, monkeys, and giant sloths lazily ate leaves from trees under the afternoon sun. Other enclosures housed strange and unusual animals—snakes with two heads, deformed turkeys with four legs rather than two, and snow-white ocelots. I paused the longest at this section. Much like me, these animals were born different and suffered for it. People considered them bizarre anomalies, either curses or wonders. I wondered whether I was expected to laugh at them or marvel at their strangeness. Instead, I felt a strange sense of kinship. “See that these are well-treated,” I ordered one of the menagerie’s keepers. All of them bowed at my approach without meeting my gaze. “Of course, Your Majesty,” the man replied obsequiously. “I assure you that your animals are well taken care of. Dedicated hunters gather meat for the carnivores, workers clean their enclosures daily, and healers cure their ills.” It said something that an emperor’s pets were better treated than most human peasants. We passed by massive fish ponds filled with freshwater on our way to another section. I blinked upon seeing a strange, blue, doglike creature with a hand for a tail staring at me from the other side of an enclosure. The animal immediately vanished into the water once spotted. An ahuizotl. I recognized it with a shiver. All the fishermen near my village learned to fear these animals. Crocodiles only attacked you when you bothered them or showed weakness, but the ahuizotl possessed a strange fondness for human eyes. They delighted in using their hand-tail to drag men and children underwater to drown them. I glanced at Necahual, studying her expression. Her tears had dried. Her hollow eyes stared into the distance, unaffected by the natural marvels surrounding her. She moved along without a word or hint of understanding of the outside world. Did my words break her, or had they gotten her thinking? Thinking? I snorted inwardly. She’ll probably go back to spitting at me once she recovers. “I want to see Itzili,” I informed the section’s keepers. Hearing my father’s name snapped Necahual out of her trance. “Where is he?” “This way, Your Majesty.” The keepers immediately offered to guide me to the enclosure. “Would you like to feed the beast?” I nodded sharply. The keepers guided us to an enclosure kept between a small horde of grazing trihorns and a couple of longnecks whose heads towered over the trees. Little Itzili roamed a space dedicated to him, which included a small pond and a nest of leaves. Feathered Tyrants were infamous predators that roamed the continent. The discovery of one usually resulted in a large hunt to either drive it off or kill it before it started preying on villages, with even the Nightlords often sending their spawn to hunt the creatures personally. Itzili was nothing like the ferocious monster I expected. When we arrived, we found the animal splashing himself in the water like a child. He looked up at us when the keepers opened the enclosure before cautiously approaching. He stared at me with his strange reptilian eyes, though I couldn’t tell if he remembered me from the audience. His wary behavior changed utterly when a keeper offered me a dead turkey. Itzili immediately realized I had come to feed him and started yapping happily. I found it adorable. “Is it safe to indulge him?” I asked the local keeper. I only ever had experience handling dogs and turkeys. “Yes,” the keeper replied. “Feathered tyrants are gregarious animals, and this one is accustomed to men. He won’t bite unless he feels threatened. But Your Majesty must never forget that a tyrant will never be a friend. If they smell weakness, they will eat even long-time handlers without remorse.” Much like a human emperor. I fed one of the turkey’s legs to Iztili. My pet tyrant leaped to catch it in midair with surprising agility. I wondered if he would keep the same swiftness once he reached adulthood. I ordered the keepers to leave Necahual and me alone with Itzili, mostly so that the former could prepare her herbal potions in peace. My mother-in-law pounded herbs together with her mortar and pestle, mixing them in ways that only made sense to a trained healer. As for me, I spent the next hour feeding Itzili. Once he had devoured the entire turkey, he let me scratch his feathers and scales. “Are you even aware that you’re a prisoner?” I whispered to the animal. “Do you resent it?” Itzili looked up at me in confusion. He did not understand me. “Men are the most miserable of all animals,” the wind whispered into my ear. “For only they understand that they were born to die.” “Can’t you give me anything less cryptic?” I muttered under my breath. “How about how I could start a war with the Sapa? Could you help with that?” “Pain is the wage of the damned,” the wind replied. “Happiness is never without its cost.” The Yaotzin wind always asked for a price. Secrets that would harm others. I knew a few, but they might come back to haunt me if revealed. I needed to hoard more knowledge to sell away. I need to recruit spies. Sources who will feed me intel that I can then use to power my Augury spell. Would Lady Sigrun help me with that? What price would she ask for? Eztli’s use of the secret passages could also help me gather information. I need allies. “Why?” Necahual asked me without warning. I looked at her over my shoulder, a hand on Itzili’s head. “Why did you name this creature after your father?” Necahual asked me while pounding herbs. I shrugged. “Because I loved him, why else?” My mother-in-law bristled, but said nothing. Necahual completed her task by evening. She had recovered enough from our discussion to offer me two small pouches of whitened powder. “For a better sleep,” she said while handing me the first pouch. “For an eternal sleep,” she added while giving me the second one after some hesitation. “Do not try anything,” I warned her while slipping both in a pocket. “If I die from ingesting it, it won’t stick, and the Nightlords will make you suffer for it.” “I know.” Necahual stared at me with some hesitation, struggling to find her words. “I… I…” “What?” I snapped at her. “Speak up.” “I…” Necahual took in a deep breath, as if confessing to a great sin. “I apologize.” I stood in place for a few seconds, my mind struggling to register what she had just said. Necahual might as well have spoken in a foreign language, for I had never heard those words coming out of her mouth before. “I apologize for… what I said earlier.” Necahual bit her lip. “I did not think clearly, and… I did not think.” “No, you did not,” I replied harshly. To my surprise, Necahual did not argue. “I understand you saved my life, Iztac, although you had every reason not to. I am not ungrateful. It…” She looked away. “It would be easier if I could blame you for everything. For what happened with your father, with my husband, and Eztli. But… I can’t. Because it’s not true.” It sounded like it physically hurt her to say that, so it was probably genuine. I still struggled to believe it. I half-wondered if both of the pouches she gave me contained poison. I wouldn’t put it past her. “She fears your magic,” the wind whispered into my ear. “She has kept your mother’s secret out of dread, for she finds submission preferable to death.” Of course. Necahual still remained a coward at heart. Still, from the way she avoided my gaze in embarrassment, she appeared genuinely ashamed. I didn’t think the woman was capable of it. Perhaps my words did reach her a bit. “I will never forgive you for all the years of abuse,” I warned her. “But for the sake of our mutual survival, and for Eztli, I will try to look past it.” “I-I will do the same.” Necahual nodded slowly. “If you need my help, I will give it.” I doubted we would ever get along, but I might learn to tolerate her one day. The evening proved more pleasant than the afternoon. As it turned out, Lady Sigrun and her family—as befitting a consort’s kin—occupied apartments on the same floor as my own. Ingrid personally came to lead me into grand chambers of polished marble, wearing the same dress as from the morning council. “I hope you shall appreciate the decorations, my lord,” she said while draping her arm around mine. Her touch felt quite pleasant, unlike with Necahual. “Our apartments aren’t as lavish as yours, but we do our best to make them cozy.” Exotic might have been a better term. I’d never seen such decorations as what I found that night. The iridescent gemstones adorning the main hall’s domed ceiling evoked the opalescent interior of a seashell. Layers of colored wood covered the walls, alongside knotworks representing strange horned warriors sailing on ships, world-devouring serpents, and wolves hunting after what I assumed were the moon and sun. The most beautiful piece remained a tapestry representing strange lights floating above a white sea. Bear furs from the north covered the ground, while torches mounted atop shield trophies glittered on the walls. Shelves full of scrolls, quills, jewelry, and potions stood next to intricate wooden chests. The place possessed its own hearth, one facing a small rock shrine covered in carved symbols and a large handcrafted table. I stared in amazement at what lay upon that same table—an exquisite replica of a strange ship around the length of my arm. The vessel did not resemble any fishing boat I had ever seen, nor anything that swam in the capital’s waterways. It possessed a single sail, mighty oars, and a reptilian head protruding from the bow. Twenty wooden men the size of my finger sailed on its hull. “What is this?” I whispered as I examined the handcrafted ship. “I’ve never seen this design.” “This is the vessel that brought my mother from Winland to Yohuachanca, my lord,” Ingrid explained softly. My sudden interest in the ship appeared to please her greatly. “The Longstrider.” For a man like me, who had dreamed of purchasing a boat to sail into the sunset, to see such a detailed replica of a ship up close was nothing short of a wonder. When I came closer, I realized that a detailed map was carved onto the table’s surface. The design represented a vast sea, with Yohuachanca and the known world rising from the west and unknown lands to the east. The ship’s position made it look like it was sailing westward toward the empire. Fascinating. I examined the eastern shores, which I assumed represented the distant Winland. Truly fascinating. “You did not tell me your husband appreciated woodcraft, Ingrid,” a musical, crystal-clear voice said from my left. I turned my head in the speaker’s direction. The most beautiful woman I had ever seen stepped into the hall from another room. The very sight of her took the breath out of my lungs. Her snow-white, unblemished skin appeared carved from marble streaked with pink at the cheeks. Her curly hair, the color of glittering gold under the summer sun, cascaded down her shoulders and back like a waterfall. Though she was taller than me, she possessed a slender, graceful figure and moved with impeccable poise. She seemed about Necahual’s age, though time did not grace her perfect face with any lines. Most striking were her pale emerald eyes, which sparkled with depth and intelligence. Her features already marked her as a foreigner, but so did her clothes. Unlike Yohuachancan dresses, her own, dyed with shades of pale gold and vibrant green, covered her arms as well as her legs. A thin ring of polished gold covered in strange letters adorned her neck—not as flexible as a necklace, yet lighter than a slave’s choker. “I’m afraid the original Longstrider has long since sunk, Lord Iztac,” the woman explained with a pleasant smile that made my heart pound in my chest. Her voice was melodious with an accent I did not recognize, gentle yet regal. “I carved this replica to the best of my ability, but memories are like tales, sometimes short on details.” It took me a few seconds to realize that this striking creature expected an answer from me. Ingrid’s amused chuckle brought flushing to my cheeks. “Lady Sigrun, I presume?” “That is my name indeed,” the woman answered with regal reverence. “I pray you will find my company most pleasant.” The daughter is a shadow of the mother. My thoughts in disarray, I had to recover from the shock. Then again, any star would look pale compared to the sun. Not even the Nightlords nor Eztli could match this woman’s allure, for she lacked the aura of death and inhumanity that vampires exuded. Even her voice sounds enchanting. “I’m sure he will, Mother,” Ingrid said. “Astrid, bow before your emperor.” I had been so struck by Lady Sigrun’s beauty that I did not notice a small girl following in her footsteps. A black-haired child dressed in more traditional clothes observed me with emerald eyes and a gentle grin. She looked no older than eight. “Greetings, Emperor Iztac,” the girl said with a cute bow. “Welcome.” “This is Astrid, my sister,” Ingrid explained gently. “Adorable, is she not?” “Indeed,” I replied. From the color of her hair and the age difference, she was probably the daughter of another emperor. “Do you have other siblings?” “My only son, Fjor, left the nest long ago,” Lady Sigrun replied calmly. While her voice sounded gentle and innocent, her eyes assessed me with a look of calculation. “He was a warrior like his father, so he joined the army. Only women and children can stay in the harem, for obvious reasons.” “I hope to meet him one day, then,” I said courteously. Since I wasn’t good with small talk, I changed the subject to the map. “Is that the boiling sea under the ship?” “And seven others,” Lady Sigrun quipped. “It took us almost a year-long journey to move from Winland to Yohuachanca. The Boiling Sea covers little more than a lake in the middle of a vaster ocean.” The more I examined the map, the more I realized how large the world truly was. Yohuachanca was the greatest empire in history, yet it looked so small and insignificant compared to the sea’s vastness. “Thankfully, a map can hold more than one country on a single sheet of paper,” Lady Sigrun said wisely. “Or a piece of wood, in this case.” An idea struck me like a bolt of lightning. “A country,” I mused out loud, my hand trailing along the carved shores, “or a painted ocean.” “My lord has a way with words,” Ingrid flattered me. “Ingrid informed me you were curious about Winland, Lord Iztac,” Lady Sigrun said. “Mayhaps you would like to hear tales of our journey over dinner?” She reads me like an open book. “I would love to.” “Astrid, would you be a dear and bring the plates?” Ingrid asked her sister before smiling at me. “Has my lord ever heard someone play the harp?” I frowned in confusion. “The harp?” “He clearly has not, Ingrid.” Lady Sigrun’s laughter sounded like splashing water. “Show him how well I taught you.” A few minutes later, we sat on comfy cushions near the hearth and enjoyed a dinner of fish and beans. Astrid served the plates and drinks, while her older sister brought over a strange string instrument nearly as tall as her. Ingrid sat and played on it, the device making beautiful sounds whenever she plucked it. “In Winland, it is customary to play music when we recount ancestral sagas,” Lady Sigrun explained as she served me food. “The harp is gentler than the drum, as I’m sure you’ll agree.” “Indeed,” I confirmed. This harp instrument sounded so slow, so melodious, so unlike any of Yohuachanca’s usual instruments. “Why would someone dare to cross such a vast sea?” “Greed and poverty,” Lady Sigrun answered with a laugh. “Most lands east of Winland were taken by strong lords, and Winland itself is awfully cold. Our captain, Leif, thought there would be warmer, richer lands to settle west. I aspired for more than snow, so I signed on for the trip.” “Your captain?” I frowned. “You were a sailor, Lady Sigrun?” “A warrior,” Lady Sigrun corrected, much to my surprise. “Women are allowed to carry weapons in Winland. Life is harsh, so we learn to defend ourselves as soon as we can walk.” She began to tell me how she ended up boarding the Longstrider with two dozen other explorers in search of gold and land. Four other ships joined them, but all either turned back or sank before they reached the western shores. “We attempted to raise a settlement, but the locals chased us off,” Lady Sigrun explained to the tune of her daughter’s melody. “A storm blew us off course north of the Boiling Sea, where the tribes informed us of a great empire with cities of gold to the south.” “Yohuachanca,” I guessed. I wondered if the Winlanders would have dared to continue their journey if the tales spoke of my homeland as coated in blood rather than gold. Lady Sigrun’s nod was slow, almost dramatic. “So entranced by the words of its glory, Captain Leif decided to continue on. Unfortunately, we ended up captured by savages along the way.” I tried to match her words with the map. I guessed the Longstrider’s crew ended in the northern borderlands bordering the Boiling Sea. “An imperial raiding party rescued us, though most of my kinsmen perished from disease or starvation beforehand. I was brought before that year’s emperor…” Lady Sigrun chuckled to herself while glancing at her daughter. “Ingrid followed nine months later.” It sounded like quite the daring tale, though I wondered if it was true. Yohuachanca was built on lies, and Lady Ingrid sounded quite happy about losing everyone she had ever known. “Don’t you miss Winland?” “Absolutely not.” Lady Sigrun waved a hand at her apartment. “I will take this single room over my family’s whole farm any day. Believe me, Lord Iztac, you too would grow bored of the biting frost and seals.” “What’s a seal?” I asked her. Lady Sigrun pointed at a fur on the wall, which belonged to some kind of gray-furred rodent the size of a dog. She must have brought this one all the way from Winland when she first arrived. “Seals are the Tlacaelel of the animal kingdom,” Lady Sigrun quipped. “All they do is yap and squeal.” The joke drew a smile from me. “Perhaps I should trade my advisor for a seal then.” “It would give better advice, that’s for sure,” Lady Sigrun said while slouching on the pillows like a sleeping jaguar on a rock. “I preferred his predecessor. At least that one could sing.” I hope his successor will pick up the pace. “I hope his successor will at least know how to dance,” Lady Sigrun echoed my own thoughts on the matter. Astrid came to deliver a honey cake dessert. “The Nightlords are bound to grow bored of his flattery one day.” Time to test her. If she guessed correctly, I might ask more of her. “Any idea who they would replace him with?” “Almost certainly Tezozomoc,” Lady Sigrun replied. “He has the age, experience, and support of the priesthood.” “I would have bet on Tayatzin,” Ingrid argued, her hands plucking one string after another. “He’s the youngest eunuch and the most energetic.” “He is, which is why he won’t be chosen.” Her mother tasted the cake with slow, aristocratic grace. “The Nightlords do not want an energetic assistant to advise their emperor. They want someone who will calm his master’s ardors and won’t rock the boat. Tezozomoc will serve them well… and the emperor, of course.” Lady Sigrun added the last part like an afterthought, like heavy sarcasm. Yet she still managed to sound innocent. Her eyes shone with mischief, revealing her true feelings. She’s been here for nearly twenty years. She knows how the game is played. Lady Sigrun held my gaze for a moment before turning her attention to her daughters. “Ingrid, can you play a little louder? Your poor mother can hardly hear you these days. Astrid, be a dear and go to bed.” “Yes, Mother,” her youngest obeyed dutifully and vanished out of the hall, while her eldest started to sing over her music. Ingrid’s strong voice echoed in the apartments alongside her melody. Lady Sigrun moved closer to me, leaning on my shoulder. Her warm breath carried whispers into my ears. “Let me deliver the poison in your pocket, my lord.” I froze. “Do not fret; the rats in the walls can’t hear us over Ingrid’s song.” Lady Sigrun’s fingers trailed a line along my cotton clothes. “Tlacaelel will be on his guard around you. He will see it coming, and your associate will perish.” “How—” “Why would you stand the presence of a woman you hate, unless you had something to gain from her? Once I learned she was a herbalist, the truth wasn’t too difficult to glimpse.” Her hand moved into my pocket and seized a pouch. “This one, or the other?” I clenched my jaw. I sensed my Tonalli awaken in response to the tension I felt, ready to tear out throats. Lady Sigrun stiffened, her eyes alert. “You think of silencing me,” she guessed. “I can sense your bloodlust.” Could she sense magic too? My hands tightened into fists. No, or else she would have ratted me out. “You have keen intuition, Lady Sigrun.” “One does not survive long within these walls without one.” She faced me, her emerald eyes staring into mine. “Your question was meant to test my knowledge, my emperor. I offer you a chance to prove my loyalty instead.” I held her gaze for a moment, my mind racing to consider my options. If I let her keep the poison, then she would have proof to rat me out with, but if she went through what I think she planned to do… then her hands would be stained with enough blood for me to trust her. It was a gamble. I thought back to what my predecessors said about her. Lady Sigrun was ambitious and clearly not stupid. She might have been Ingrid’s mother, but at the end of the day, she remained a concubine. The Nightlords cared little for her, and I could replace her with a word. She had more to gain by earning my favor over Tlacaelel’s and more to lose by making an enemy of me. “The other pocket,” I whispered. Lady Sigrun grabbed the poison and hid it under a pillow so swiftly that I doubted anyone watching us could have seen it. If Ingrid noticed anything, she didn’t show it. “I can tell a patient snake apart from a cowed songbird,” she said while resting her head against my shoulder. “Do not invite Tlacaelel to breakfast, or his mistresses would suspect the truth. Let me handle him. He will die by the week’s end.” “You’ve done this before,” I guessed. “Of course. Though few of your predecessors dared to ask me to murder someone in their name. I find it refreshing.” Her finger playfully pinched my cheek, as if I were an adorable child. “I know everything that happens inside this palace, except the hidden passages and forbidden areas. My reach extends beyond the walls too. If you need information on what happens outside or to smuggle something in, I can help you. I have many other talents, as you will soon find out.” By now, I’d learned nothing was free in this world. “What do you want in exchange?” “First of all, I want you to treat my daughter well… and then, I want you to treat me well.” Lady Sigrun let go of my cheek, her gaze sharp and calculating. “Do we have an understanding, Iztac?” I squinted at her. “Yes.” “Good.” Lady Sigrun smirked at her daughter. “Ingrid.” “Yes, Mother?” “The Emperor is tired,” her mother said with a laugh. “Show him what he was missing out on with his Nightkin.” part0015. 10BEHIND THE VEIL Icould barely see anything beyond her face. Oil lamps near the bedroom’s walls barely lit up the darkness. A pleasant smell of burning logs came from the fireplace, but I paid it no mind. I only smelled her flower perfume. The fur blanket wasn’t half as warm as her naked skin. “Deeper,” Ingrid whispered with a whimpering sound. She moaned under me, her legs wrapped around me. Her arms pulled me closer as I drove into her again and again. She wouldn’t let me go. “Yes… Here’s your place, my emperor… Yes…” I could only answer with a grunt. I was on top of her, in her, holding her. The mattress creaked under us, but I didn’t care. The whole world could have been collapsing on my head, and I wouldn’t notice. I couldn’t tell how long it had been since dinner. Seconds, minutes, hours? It didn’t matter. I couldn’t focus on anything but Ingrid. It shouldn’t feel this good. Eztli and I… We shared something special, so it felt wrong when Ingrid led me to the bed. I tried to protest, saying we didn’t have to do anything, but then she did that thing with her mouth and fingers, and before I knew it, we were in bed. I could die happy right now. I tried to tell myself that Eztli said she wouldn’t mind sharing me with the other wives, that Ingrid and I were married too, and that I needed to play up being the emperor so no one would suspect me. But these were just excuses. I was making love to Ingrid because it felt good. Nothing more. A blissful jolt of lightning coursed through my back, and my body tensed. Ingrid tightened her embrace, as if afraid I would disappear. My loins ached and then I saw stars. I finished with a grunt. After the bliss came the emptiness. My breathing shortened as the rush of pleasure receded. Ingrid relaxed her grip on me, her heartbeat slowing down. I rolled off her and stared at the ceiling, trying to put my thoughts in order. A mosaic of a red, bicephalous wolf loomed over me. Two creatures in one body. I didn’t know why, but the sight drew a chuckle out of me. I would have bet my throne that Lady Sigrun put it there intentionally. “We have pulque,” Ingrid murmured against my shoulder. She put a hand across my chest, her fingers caressing my nipples. “Or chocolate, if you prefer a sweet drink.” I could hardly think of anything sweeter than what happened just now. It had been so different from my first time with Eztli. First of all, Ingrid was warm to the touch, not lukewarm, breathing and full of life. She was more experienced too. She taught me much. Still, no matter how pleasant our lovemaking was, I felt it lacked something. My first time with Eztli was more… affectionate? We went a long way and held nothing back, whereas I always sensed a certain distance between Ingrid and me. Our bodies worked in sync, but our hearts did not beat as one. In the end, we were just using each other. “Warm chocolate would be nice,” I whispered as I snuggled against her. “But I don’t want you to leave the bed right now.” Ingrid smiled sweetly and then kissed me. A new jolt coursed through my spine, and my arms moved around her waist to pull her closer. If I wasn’t spent, I would make love to her all over again. “It was my first time with a man,” Ingrid confessed when she let go of my lips. “I’m glad it was with you.” “First time?” It actually surprised me. “It didn’t feel that way.” “My mother taught me well. Men aren’t allowed in the harem, except emperors, and the Nightlords forbade them from touching me.” She snuggled against me. “I was meant for you, my lord.” The word “lord” immediately soured my mood. “Stop calling me that, Ingrid,” I said. “Just call me Iztac, at least when we’re alone. “ “As you wish, Iztac.” Ingrid raised an eyebrow. “You don’t like being emperor, do you?” I scoffed. “Are you looking forward to being sacrificed?” “I prefer to think we’ll live like gods for a year. Sure, the last days will suck, but how many peasants would trade their lives for ours?” Ingrid shrugged. “We do not choose our destiny, Iztac, nor fight it. The best we can do is make the most of our fate.” Her reasoning made sense. After all, I briefly shared it on the first day of my tenure. With no way to keep my freedom, wallowing in luxury and accepting my fate had seemed almost appealing. It would have meant becoming no different than the animals in my menagerie, but they seemed happy enough. Yet I rejected that answer and decided to challenge fate. Still, I could hardly fault Ingrid for her choices. She had a family who would outlive her and lacked my magic. Making the most of her current situation made sense from her perspective. The bedroom’s door opened, and Lady Sigrun walked in with a platter. I instinctively pulled up the blanket to better cover Ingrid’s nakedness, but this only drew a laugh from her mother. “You are kind to defend my daughter’s honor, Lord Iztac,” Lady Sigrun teased me. She set the platter on a bed table and offered me a warm chocolate drink. “But we have nothing to hide from each other.” I sat against a pillow and accepted the drink. My fingers brushed against Sigrun’s for a second, and my eyes wandered to… other parts of her body. I wonder if she’s as good in bed as Ingrid. I blushed slightly at the thought. Doubly so when Sigrun smirked as if she had read my mind. Get a hold of yourself, Iztac! Don’t let your cock think for you! That woman was an experienced politician and quite dangerous. I needed to keep her at arm’s length until I figured out whether she would make a good ally or an enemy. Sigrun’s eyes glittered in the fireplace’s light. “You have more self-control than most, Lord Iztac, but you still have much to learn.” I didn’t deny it. “Would you teach me?” “If that is your wish.” Sigrun kissed her daughter on the cheek. “Ingrid, would you kindly play the harp after finishing your drink? I will give the emperor a massage.” “Lucky you, Iztac.” Ingrid chuckled. “Mother is a magician with her hands.” I hoped not. Sigrun was dangerous enough without sorcery. After satiating my thirst, I lay on the bed with my back exposed. Lady Sigrun began to coat my skin in oil while Ingrid put on a dress and brought the harp into the room. I briefly closed my eyes and listened to her notes. “Is every room in this palace unsafe to speak in?” I muttered under my breath. “For you? Yes.” I shivered as Lady Sigrun’s hands traveled along my spine. “The Nightlords always have at least one spy following the emperor around. His four consorts are under constant surveillance too, though thankfully for me, they usually ignore the imperial harem. Concubines do not truly matter in the grand scheme of things.” I suspected as much. No wonder Lady Sigrun could smuggle goods in. The Nightlords believed her beneath their notice, allowing her to gather influence relatively unimpeded. According to my predecessors, Sigrun had accumulated quite a network of contacts over her time in the palace. There were so many things I needed; information I could use to sabotage the empire; blackmail material I could sell to the Yaotzin; agents I could trust to do my bidding. I needed⁠— “Everything,” I said. “I want your full cooperation in everything.” Sigrun scoffed. “Are you willing to give me everything?” “I can give you what you want,” I replied. “I will treat Ingrid well and see that your family is taken care of.” “That is not enough.” Lady Sigrun's hands began to press against my back, gently but firmly. “When you looked at the walls outside, what did you see?” “A pen.” “A pen, yes. Everyone inside this palace, from the guards to the workers, is livestock for the Nightlords.” Sigrun applied pressure to my shoulders. “You are a stallion, and we concubines are mares.” “Stallion? Mares?” I frowned in confusion. “I do not know these animals.” “I keep forgetting Yohuachanca doesn’t have horses,” Lady Sigrun said, confusing me even more. “Let me rephrase my point—you are a turkey, and we are hens. Your role is to look good and feed our owners; ours is to lay eggs, make chicks, and entertain you.” Now her hands moved to my neck. “What do you think happens to hens who outlive their usefulness?” she asked me, her voice cold and deadly. I scowled. “They get eaten.” “Our owners have us for dinner.” Her thumbs pressed against my shoulders, which hurt me a bit. “When your time ends and another emperor takes your place, I will have to prove myself to them to avoid the altar. Everyone who doesn't make the cut is culled.” “The imperial harem reached three thousand concubines at its apex,” Tlacaelel had told me on my first day. “Though we had to sacrifice those past childbearing age, the sick, the useless, and the infirm before your coronation.” That purge happened each year, and over five hundred emperors preceded me. I dared not calculate the number of victims in my head. Man or woman, slave or emperor, we were all meat in the end. “There are only three ways a concubine can stay alive for long in this place,” Lady Sigrun explained as her daughter played a higher-pitched, more lively song than the last. “One, they must know how to charm an emperor. They must be beautiful, wise, and entertaining.” “That shouldn’t be too hard,” I complimented her. “Your beauty is only matched by your wit.” “Thank you,” she replied with a chuckle. “But beauty is in the eye of the beholder, Iztac. For some men, a woman is never young enough, thin enough, tall enough, etc.” Considering my predecessors still held her in high regard even after death, I guessed she had been perfect enough for all of them. “Second, they must prove their health and fertility.” Lady Sigrun began to massage my hips and thighs. “A concubine’s primary role is to bear the emperor’s children. Those who can no longer conceive are slain.” My eyes widened in surprise. “Do you want me to⁠—” “If need be, yes.” Lady Sigrun's fingers moved uncomfortably close to a certain area… “I try to avoid having too many children so as not to accumulate weight, but it has been a while since I had Astrid. The Nightlords might grow to believe that the well has dried.” Something about the way Lady Sigrun spoke of children—as a resource to be carefully managed to stave off the executioner’s knife—disturbed me to my core. I glanced at Ingrid, looking for… unease, I guessed? She answered me with a grin while plucking the strings. Her eyes did not smile when her lips did. “What happens to the children of concubines?” I asked her mother. “The boys leave to join the army when they come of age,” Lady Sigrun replied, the lamps’ light reflecting in her eyes. “Most girls end up joining the harem as either concubines or true consorts. The Nightlords believe an emperor's blood has magical properties and must be refined.” I never truly considered having children—I would have been lucky to find a wife with my condition. Knowing my sons and daughters would either become cannon fodder or breeding material only soured me further on the idea. “And three, a concubine must be useful. And to do that, I will need to earn favors from a few individuals, which I can then trade to your successor.” Lady Sigrun’s hand trailed a line along my spine. “So tell me, Lord Iztac… What do you have to offer?” I thought over her words and immediately noticed a troubling detail. “You speak as if I will die next year,” I said. “As if my fate is set in stone. It doesn’t have to be.” Lady Sigrun’s eyes narrowed, although I couldn’t tell if it was out of disdain or sympathy. “I will not help you plot against the Nightlords and their kin, Lord Iztac. Palace intrigues carry their risks and rewards. Plotting against the vampires can only end in failure and disgrace. I’ve been here for nearly twenty years, Lord Iztac, so take my word for it—you cannot kill a Nightlord.” “Your daughter will die if we do not try.” Ingrid froze for a second, her face unreadable. Her surprise only lasted a second before she started playing again. Her mother, meanwhile, simply shrugged. “Ingrid will not survive the year, but Astrid and I will. We have made peace with the situation. You would better spend your last year either enjoying yourself or putting your affairs in order than waste it on an impossible task.” An impossible task. Lady Sigrun didn’t believe the status quo could change. Perhaps she had tried once, when she was younger and more naïve. Watching nearly two dozen emperors fail probably hardened her. Could I reveal my magic to her? That we had a chance? No. Not only would she probably disbelieve my words, but they might make their way back to the Nightlords. Besides, sorcery only let me hope for victory without guaranteeing it. Besides, I did not fully trust her yet. I should test her first. “What favors would you need from me?” I asked her. Lady Sigrun smiled. Now, we were negotiating. “First of all, Ingrid must become your favorite consort in public. Heed her advice when you hold court. Show her affection. As her mother, people will come to me.” I glanced at Ingrid, who still showed no reaction. “Second, you must regularly invite me too,” Lady Sigrun explained while massaging my back. I had to admit that I found it quite relaxing. “Let me join you for breakfast, send me gifts, and show the world that you appreciate my company. Once I suggest a set of appointments, you must follow through with them.” In short, I needed to tell the world that Ingrid and her mother were my favorites. That they had my ears. That way, whoever they looked favorably upon would receive a share of their wealth and glory. “I see no issues in giving you what you ask for,” I replied. If we were to form an alliance, we were bound to meet regularly anyway. “What will you give in return?” “Not everything, but I can offer much.” She lowered her head until part of her hair brushed against my back. “What do you need? Besides Tlacaelel’s head on a platter? That one is for free.” Lady Sigrun was a true merchant. I should take a leaf from her book. I should start by asking much and settling down for a compromise. “I want information on the Sapa Empire, especially their delegation,” I said. “I want blackmail material on this palace’s staff. The guards, the workers… You said you knew everything that happens within these walls. Well, I want to know it too.” “You are quite greedy, Lord Iztac.” “I can prove generous too.” The two of us could play the game. “I have an alternate method to gain information from outside the palace. Secrets that might prove useful to you.” This immediately caught her interest. Though Lady Sigrun kept a neutral expression, I could almost taste her curiosity in the air. “How?” “Will you name your contacts?” I asked her. “Of course not.” “Then you do not need to know mine either.” I doubted she would take me seriously if I told her I spoke to the wind. “My source repays secrets with secrets. If you give me incriminating information I can sell away, then I can fulfill a request of my own too.” Lady Sigrun studied my face, looking for any hint of trickery. I returned her gaze without a word. “You are bluffing,” she said. “You were a mere peasant a few days ago. While you might have made allies in the palace, your reach cannot reach farther than mine.” “If you have a test in mind, pay the price, and I will happily pass it.” “It won’t hurt to try,” Lady Sigrun conceded. “I will not grant you access to all my knowledge. You have not proved worthy yet of such a large commitment from me, though that might change in the future. For now, let us work on a favor for favor basis.” I scoffed. “Until we learn to trust each other?” “Trust is more precious than gold within these walls.” Lady Sigrun smiled ear to ear, her perfect teeth white as chalk. “I shall give you a sample of what I can get you and see what you can do with it.” I hoped it would be worth its cost. Massages were quite relaxing. Enough that I could find sleep without Necahual’s drugs. Unlike my last two visits to the Underworld, I landed directly in Mictlan. I woke up in the plaza where Queen Mictecacihuatl taught me the Doll spell and received a biting welcome. “About time!” Xolotl gnawed at my arm for a good minute before he agreed to let me go. He licked his fangs. “Mmm… You have gained meat.” “I suppose I do eat much better nowadays.” Eating meat regularly did wonders for my muscles. I still remained quite gaunt, but I was no longer starved. “Shouldn’t you be off gathering lost souls?” “Do I detect a hint of blame in your voice?” Xolotl scratched his back. “Is this about those two souls you brought to Mictlan? I would have gotten them eventually.” I snorted in skepticism. “You lost them for decades.” “That’s barely the time to blink for a god like me! Is that the way to thank good Xolotl for doing a thankless job?” The dog deity eyed me maliciously. “You know, all of my twins are technically entitled to chewing you when you arrive in the Underworld. Maybe we should all take a turn.” “Fine, fine.” I didn’t have anything to win by antagonizing Xolotl, and I had another target in mind. “Might you know where I could find the Market of Years?” Xolotl chuckled ominously. “Oh, are you going to confront the old coyote?” Yes, though I had a secondary objective in mind. “Do you know if they sell maps there?” “You can find anything that was lost and forgotten at the market.” Xolotl tilted his head to the side, his eyes mischievous. “I can show you the way if you like… so long as you never doubt my work as a guide again.” That proposal smelled fishy to me. By now, I had frequented Xolotl long enough to realize he never did anything for free. He wanted a favor from me in return, though I wondered what. Since I needed to go to Mictlan’s markets regardless, I accepted the offer with a sharp nod. Xolotl led me out of the bone plaza and onto fossilized skin streets. As I examined the crooked, chalky buildings that towered over the alleys, I realized Mictlan was built on more corpses than just Mictlantecuhtli’s. Walls of animal skulls loomed next to vertebral hallways. Most belonged to beasts, but I recognized a few human bones merged with the rest. Xolotl noticed my curiosity and decided to enlighten me. “Everything dies, my delicious Iztac, but only humans have the force of will to keep going for long,” Xolotl explained. “Once centuries pass and boredom settles in, the dead simply lay down. Their bones merge with the city, while their dulled minds fade into eternal slumber. This is the final sleep.” “Are they…” I struggled to find the right word as I examined a human skull holding a torch in its mouth, lighting the alleyway. “Aware? Like the Parliament?” “The sleeping dead are no more aware than plants. Some of them wake up after centuries and try their hand at unlife again, but those are few and far between.” Xolotl chuckled darkly. “As for your friends’ skulls, the pain keeps them sharp.” The Parliament of Skulls experienced everything their successors did. My death on the altar would force them to relive their own torment all over again. Xolotl guided me to one of the waterways crossing the city. A skeleton on a skiff awaited us, his bones wrapped in tattered black clothes. “The boatmen transport the dead from one district to another. This one will take you to the Market of Years, if you ask kindly.” I couldn’t help but chuckle at his laziness. “You won’t lead me to the market yourself?” “I said I would show you the way, not that I would hold your hand. I have work to do, thank you very much.” Xolotl scratched his back. “Is there something else you wish to ask of me?” He wants to ask a favor from me, but a god does not beg a mortal for help. He would rather portray it as a payment for a service. I pondered what he could do for me before an idea hit me. “You’ve guided every single person who has ever died, right?” “Correct.” Xolotl immediately smelled an opportunity for a deal. “Is there a specific soul you’re interested in, my young mortal friend?” “My father, Itzili.” He should have made his way to Mictlan, and a part of me deeply wished to meet him again, if only for comfort. “Could you find him?” Xolotl cackled. “Not for free.” Of course. “You want to chew my leg as well as my arm?” “Tempting, but no.” Xolotl thought over his price for a few seconds before asking me another question. “Do you still intend to travel down into the lower levels of the Land of the Dead Suns?” “I don’t have a choice,” I replied. The more information I gathered on the world above, the more I realized mastering sorcery would be my only way to escape the Nightlords’ grasp. “I’ve found a way to fulfill Lord Mictlantecuhtli’s request.” “Is that so?” Xolotl tilted his head at me curiously. “I have a twin down there. The god you mortals know as Quetzalcoatl. Unfortunately, I am not allowed to leave this layer, let alone visit him.” Quetzalcoatl? He was one of the four suns I was supposed to visit and claim the embers from, the lord of art and the wind. “Do you want me to carry a message?” “Of a sort… but we can discuss it once you convince my king to open the gate.” Xolotl turned his back on me. “There are thousands of Itzili in this city, but now that I’ve tasted your blood, it shouldn’t take long for me to find him. We shall meet again on your next trip, my dear Iztac.” “I thank thee, Lord Xolotl,” I replied with a formal bow. The favor sounded light enough, though it implied I would need to survive my trip down to the lower layers. Once Xolotl bolted back into the alleys, I asked the boatsman for a spot on his skiff, which he graciously agreed to. “I seek the Market of Years,” I said. “How much will it cost?” “A conversation,” the undead replied, much to my surprise. “You must be new. We boatmen do not guide the dead for money. We do it to stave off the final sleep.” “Ah, I understand.” I glanced at countless houses of bones. “You need a hobby not to join them?” “All of us must,” the boatman said, his rotten teeth flashing a smile. “A good routine is the road to life.” It made a great deal of sense. Death freed souls of bodily needs and pleasures. When one couldn’t drink, eat, or sleep, existence became truly dull without an active effort to carry on. Only work and play remained to keep a soul going. The boatsman used a long, rotten pole of fossilized wood to carry us across Mictlan’s purple waters. The city’s riverways were eerily quiet, with naught but the sound of raindrops hitting their surface to break the monotony. The boatman—who had long forgotten his own name—proved a nice conversationalist. “So, if I understand correctly,” whispered the boatman. “If you fail to defeat these vampires, you will be sacrificed and spend eternity in torment?” “Pretty much.” My host nodded to himself. “That’s rough, buddy.” “Yes, it is rough.” I sighed. “But when I think of how many were sacrificed on my homeland’s altars, my soul would be a mere drop in an ocean of blood.” “If they have been at it for over five hundred years, these vampires must have reaped millions.” The boatman shrugged. “I am surprised. I thought almost all of us dead ones ended up in this city, one way or another.” “I heard that dead warriors and women who perished in childbirth followed the sun across the sky,” I said. The priests said the First Emperor rewarded the brave by letting them follow in his celestial footsteps. The boatman shook his head. “I heard the same tales when I was alive, but they were wrong. King or slave, warrior or coward, we all end up in the same place. Those who die of lightning and drowning go to Tlalocan, though.” “Tlalocan? The land of Tlaloc?” Tlaloc was said to have been the sun before his wife Chalchiuhtlicue. “The second layer of the Underworld beneath Mictlan, where Lord Tlaloc holds sway,” the boatman confirmed. “See, souls sacrificed to a god go to that god’s realm when they die. Lord Tlaloc holds sway over those who perished from his storms.” Interesting… I wondered if there was a connection between that mechanism and my own curse. Queen Mictecacihuatl warned me that all vampires descended from a god that arose from the Underworld’s lower depths. If it was the First Emperor of legends, then perhaps it was he who prevented Yohuachanca’s emperors from truly passing on. “What can you tell me about the second layer?” I questioned the boatman. “Not much. King Mictlantecuhtli does not let the dead venture into the lower levels, nor does he allow the creatures below to invade Mictlan. Which suggests that the place must be a special kind of hell.” The boatman lowered his back as we traveled under a bridge of interwoven spines. “However…” “However?” “I’ve heard rumors of a witch who can travel freely across the Land of the Dead Suns. She makes her lair in a place called Xilbaba, the House of Fright, somewhere in Tlalocan.” The boatman shrugged. “Might be nothing but empty tales.” “Maybe,” I replied, though if that witch was indeed the person I had in mind… then I now knew where to look for my mother. Xilbaba… I heard the Market of Years long before it came into sight—flute melodies and the beat of thunderous drums echoed in the air for miles around the place. Many other skiffs—some carrying dozens of lost souls—traveled in that direction, toward basalt plazas and porphyry spires, to the point that it clogged the waterway where the boatman dropped me nearby. “You’ll be quicker on foot from here,” he said. “Just follow the music.” “I shall.” I jumped onto the docks and politely bade him goodbye. “Thank you for the conversation.” A few minutes afterward, I joined the crowds walking into the Market of Years. The place drew a gasp from me, for it put even the capital’s markets to shame. Hundreds of stalls crafted from the remains of colossal creatures—from longneck ribcages to feathered tyrant skulls—sprawled before me in maze-like lines. Skeletal merchants adorned with tattered garments beckoned visiting souls to come closer with slow gestures and welcoming whispers, to witness their wares. Since I stood out from the rest of the city as a Tlacatecolotl—having flesh to cover most of my bones—I brought attention to myself. Merchants singled me out from the crowd, and I indulged them by checking out their stands. The dead had no need for food or drink, and since nothing alive made its way to the Underworld, I saw no fruit or meat. Instead, the merchants offered a vast array of crafted goods—obsidian mirrors, polished bone instruments, ceramic pottery, tattered textiles, and entangled tapestries. For the most part, these stalls did not change much from what one could find above ground. However, the deeper I went into the market, the stranger the offerings became. A shop sold hundreds of keys made of various materials, from rusty metal to bone and stone. Another merchant sold tablets taller than me, each of which was inscribed with a carved monster. I heard voices whispering from within the stone when I approached closely. A third sold strange wooden boxes covered in odd symbols. I found these goods so odd that I stopped to examine them more closely. “These are puzzle boxes, oh spirit,” the merchant explained, amused by my curiosity. “The Tollan civilization used them to keep secrets. Find the correct combination, and the box will reveal a message to you.” “The Tollans?” I squinted while studying one of the boxes. Each face was made of nine small cubes, which appeared capable of moving around. “I’ve never heard of them.” “They vanished a few hundred…” The merchant scratched the back of his head. “A few thousand years ago? It has been so long, I can no longer remember.” I had to admit that I was curious about what kind of civilization built these toys. “How did you find these boxes?” “I picked them up,” the merchant replied with a shrug. “Goods trickle down from the stone skies, and the lost call to the lost. I gathered three, four, and before I knew it, one box found its way to me each century.” “Very interesting,” I said while putting the puzzle box back on the stand. “How much would these boxes cost?” “I usually sell them for a year of company,” the merchant rasped with a crooked smile. “But for a spirit, I am willing to settle for a month.” I finally understood the meaning behind the market’s name. The Market of Years’ currency was not gold but time. The dead traded weeks, months, or years of service and company in order to stave off their final sleep. Unfortunately, I didn’t have a month to spare, so I politely refused his offer and carried on. I checked the stalls until I found one that sold old, tattered scrolls and books. Most of them were written in dead languages I couldn’t understand, but one included an outdated map of the continent. “You have a good eye, spirit,” the merchant flattered me. “This is a map of the Boiling Sea from two hundred years ago.” “Three,” I corrected him. Yohuachanca’s frontiers were a fraction of what they were today. Half a dozen dead empires stood on the dry parchment, the ink shaping their borders like an epitaph. Thankfully, the Boiling Sea itself hadn’t changed at all. It would serve me well. “How much for this one?” Thankfully, he didn’t ask for time. “What do you offer, spirit?” An idea crossed my mind. “Have you ever flown?” The merchant stroked his bony chin. “Flown?” I answered by adopting my Tonalli shape. A few startled visitors shrieked in surprise as my arms transformed into wings and my legs into talons, but many more gathered around me out of curiosity. I assumed most of them had never heard of a Tlacatecolotl, let alone seen one. “I will buy your map for ten minutes of flight,” I offered the astonished merchant. “I shall carry you in my talons as we fly over the city. You will remember this memory for centuries.” “Oh my…” The merchant gave thought to my proposal and agreed with a nod. “I would be thankful, oh spirit.” A few minutes and a short aerial tour of the city later, I walked away from the stall with a map. The merchant—who went by the name of Tolteca—offered me a bag of worn leather to carry the map around in, in exchange for the promise that I would come back to visit his stall. I actually intended to follow through; knowledge was power, and some of the scrolls he sold might contain secrets I could use. Unfortunately, transforming into a bird and offering a flying tour of Mictlan came with downsides; namely, hordes of bored skeletons all but begging for their turn. “I will give you a mirror for ten minutes of your time, oh spirit!” one said. “Will you take my son for a ride in exchange for a statue?” another offered. “Please, crush me under your mighty talons,” a third all but pleaded with a tone far from chaste. “I beg of you!” “Uh, I am forbidden from harming the dead,” I replied to the latter while returning to my human form. “I’m looking for someone called Huehuecoyotl. Could you point me in his direction?” Ten fingers pointed in a gaudy tent’s direction, one located on the very outskirts of the marketplace. Its orange-and-purple coloring stood out from the other stall in many ways, and I couldn’t recognize its texture; the cloth appeared to simmer like a fading dream, and the diaphanous veils covering the entrance glowed brighter than a rainbow. A garish-painted signboard stood near the threshold, with words appearing in common Yohuachancan the moment I gave it a look. Huehuecoyotl’s Spirit Message Agency! Tired of waiting for friends and family to arrive? Contact your living relatives now! The service is to die for! That… sounded fishy. Very fishy. I walked past the veils and into a space far bigger than the outside would suggest. A ring of ghostly flames floated at the edge of the room, illuminating it. Two undead sat on wooden chairs around a crystal sphere sitting atop a table and a crimson cloak. It seemed I had walked into the middle of a performance of sorts. “Do you see, ma’am?” A strange man sat behind the table, whispering with a voice brimming with power. Much like every other citizen of the Underworld, not a single scrap of flesh covered his bones. However, his skull belonged not to a man but to a canine of some kind. Unlike most people outside, his ceremonial clothes—which included a cotton jacket and an embroidered cloak—were made of refined, colorful material rather than tattered scraps. “Do you see your dear husband?” “Yes, I see him,” the client said, an undead woman who differed from her fellows outside only by the golden rings glittering on her fingers. “My Khuno… he has remained faithful!” I approached closer to get a better look. These two stared into the crystal ball with such intensity that they didn’t notice me. To my surprise, I witnessed images swirling on its surface. I saw a handsome man with Sapa-like features and graying hair in a village with mountains in the background. The vivid level of detail astonished me. The color of the sky, the wrinkles on the man’s skin, the sound of the wind blowing in the background… I even detected a sweet, flowery smell coming from the crystal ball. It was as if its surface was a window into the world above. Is that an Augury spell? I wondered as I watched the man whisper words before a strange stone totem in a tongue I could not understand. No, my own version cannot show me visions. This is something else. “His devotion for you never wavered,” the coyote-headed man said—whom I now assumed was Huehuecoyotl. “Countless women threw themselves at his feet, but none could match you in his heart.” “He is praying…” The client covered her mouth in surprise. “Has he finally become our tribe’s shaman?” “Indeed,” Huehuecoyotl confirmed with a happy nod. “The entire Quillan tribe bows before his wisdom.” And then I remembered that Huehuecoyotl was a known trickster. “He’s lying to you,” I said with a snort of disdain. “The Quillan were conquered five years ago.” The women didn’t appear to notice. “I am so proud of him…” she whispered with a sob, completely entranced by the vision. “All this time, I thought he would only shame me…” “Excuse me?” I waved a hand in front of the woman’s eyes. She did not even react. “Hello?” “Are you going to shut up, man?!” Huehuecoyotl snapped at me. “She can’t hear you, and I would appreciate it if you would stop interrupting my⁠—” The conman stopped upon examining me more closely. His empty eye holes stared at my face, then at the fire in my chest, and finally at my legs. His gaze strangely lingered the longest on them. “Is that an ass?” he asked me, rising from his seat to take a better look. I held his gaze, too puzzled by his question to react. Something in his tone sent shivers down my spine. “It is an ass—two beautiful mounds of flesh! And that stinger…” His empty eye holes lit up with a disturbing green glow. “Is that a perfectly functional appendage?” His hand moved across the table and put his hand between my legs, at a spot that only Eztli and Ingrid dared to explore. To protect myself, I changed into a bird. My arms unfurled into black wings whose span reached from one end of the tent to the other. My sharp beak let out a screech high-pitched enough to raise the dead. My nails grew into talons sharp enough to tear flesh asunder. Countless would have recoiled in fear at the sight of my transformation. Huehuecoyotl answered it with two words. “Even better,” he muttered. What was wrong with this… this fool? Huehuecoyotl’s fascination with me broke the concentration of his spell. The pictures on the crystal ball’s surface faded away, along with the smell and sound, which allowed the client to return to reality. “Mister? What is—AH!” She fell out of her chair, screaming upon seeing me. Huehuecoyotl waved a hand at her almost dismissively. “Don’t worry ma’am, everything’s under control! Take a good look—it’s just a turkey spirit!” I glared at him, but the woman immediately calmed down. “Oh right, I hadn’t noticed,” she said, even chuckling at me. Me. A giant owl who could tear her to shreds. “Poor me, scared out of her own shadow…” “Yes, yes, yes, ma’am, you need to take a rest!” Huehuecoyotl said while gently pushing her toward the exit. “I’ll send your regards to your husband!” “But—” she protested. “It’s been a pleasure, come back never!” Huehuecoyotl all but shoved his customer through his tent’s veil. Then he immediately turned to face me, his hands trembling in excitement. “Are you a Tlacatecolotl?” “No, I am a giant turkey.” Now that we were alone in the tent, my eyes wandered from the strange coyote-man to his crystal ball. “Was that the Veil spell you used?” “Ah, and he’s a smart customer too!” Huehuecoyotl crossed his arms and nodded with a smug grin. “Indeed, my dear feathered visitor, this is all my Veil’s doing! The pictures, the places, everything! Even the tent’s colors are fake!” He snapped his fingers, and the tent immediately gained a few hundred years. Holes appeared on the cloth, the cloak covering the table vanished, and even the pristine crystal ball turned into a half-shattered stone. I had to confess that I was impressed. If the Veil spell could trick my senses so easily or prevent that woman from hearing my voice, I could use it to hide my activities. Still, I couldn’t close my eyes on Huehuecoyotl’s trickery. “So you indeed lied to that woman.” I glared at this crook. “Have you no shame, exploiting her grief?” “Look, man, if someone is stupid enough to believe I can contact the living, clearly they’re guilty of willful ignorance! They’re the real criminals! I would even say I’m doing a service, a public service!” He just kept inventing new excuses on the spot, too fast for me to counter them. “I’m not selling the truth, I’m selling an experience! A good con is like good sex, it requires mutual consent! She’s going to come back for more, you’ll see⁠—” At my wit’s end, I activated my Doll spell and targeted that unruly mouth of his. I was very much inexperienced in it so I only managed to snap his jaw shut with enough strength to crack one of Huehuecoyotl’s teeth. I immediately regretted my action, until he let out a muffled squeal of pleasure. “Are you… do you enjoy getting hurt?” I released him on the spot, my pity immediately turning to disgust. “What is your problem?” If anything, Huehuecoyotl only managed to dig himself deeper. “Do you understand what you can do with only a pelvis bone and your imagination? Not much!” I held his gaze in silence, judging and looking down on him. “Hey, hey, come on, stop looking at me like that…” The old coyote laughed in embarrassment. “I would have reacted the same if you had a pair of breasts. I mean, can you imagine hundreds of years without seeing a piece of flesh? Seeing you, it’s like witnessing the miracle of life all over again!” Xolotl, that bastard, knew. They all knew. I have to bear it. For the sake of victory, I was willing to deal with this… piece of garbage. This is nothing compared to what I’ve endured. “Anyway…” Huehuecoyotl slouched back in his chair, his legs crossed and his hands behind the back of his head. “Why did you come to my humble shop, mister…” “Iztac,” I replied, my blood boiling when Huehuecoyotl whistled at me. “Stop it.” “Come on, Izty, relax.” Unfortunately, my unease only encouraged the dirty coyote. “I don’t bite, I nibble.” “Stop it.” I dared not return to my human shape, lest he do something inappropriate. “I have come to learn the Veil spell from you. Just teach me and I’ll be on my way.” “Whoa, whoa, slow down, birdie. It took me many, many years of practice to master my Veil spell!” Huehuecoyotl licked his fangs in a way that I found deeply unsettling. “If you want my expertise, you’ll have to pay up one way or another...” Come on, Iztac, he’s toying with you. I could see the mischief in his eyes. This old coyote delighted in making me squirm. If I was to triumph, I couldn’t indulge him. I gathered my breath, thought over my options, and regained my composure. “I am a Tlacatecolotl, he who can travel between the living world and the house of the dead,” I said with all the dignity I could muster. “There is much I can offer you, Huehuecoyotl. Greater rewards than childish pleasures.” “Greater rewards, eh?” Huehuecoyotl meditated on my words for a few seconds, a dark chuckle rising from his throat. “Eh… Eh…” His chuckle grew into a billowing laugh, then a burst of hysterical laughter that echoed into the tent. I waited for him to calm down, as stoic and silent as a stone weathering the wind. “All right, all right… I’ll teach you my beautiful spell.” Huehuecoyotl rubbed his thumb and index finger together. “If you pass a very simple test. A trifle, truly.” The Parliament’s warning weighed heavily on my mind. Expect to be pranked. “Go on.” Huehuecoyotl joined his hands, his teeth arranged into a ghastly smile. “Make me happy,” he said. part0016. 11THE FOURTH SUN Huehuecoyotl laughed like a child as I carried him in the air. The Underworld’s winds battered my wingspan, and carrying the old conman proved quite difficult. Huehuecoyotl could hardly ride my back for two seconds before swinging his body from left to right in an attempt to catch a glimpse of the world below. I flew circles around Mictlan’s walls and Mictlantecuhtli’s finger towers while desperately trying to prevent my overactive passenger from falling. “Amazing!” Huehuecoyotl whipped purple raindrops off his skull. “A bit too wet, but amazing!” “Are you happy yet?!” I shouted back, having carried him for half an hour already. “Mmm…” Huehuecoyotl stroked his chin. He considered my question for a few minutes before answering with a flat “No.” I had never ridden a trihorn in my life, let alone a dead one. “Run, my champion!” Huehuecoyotl shouted at me from the stands, his voice barely cutting through the noise and cheers of the roaring undead audience. “You’re almost there!” I gritted my teeth, my hands hanging on to a skeletal trihorn’s rib cage as it rushed across a stadium with giant bones for stands and a running track built out of fossilized flesh. Three other trihorn riders rushed after me with maddened lights glittering in their empty eyeholes. They would trample me to death in a heartbeat—if they still had hearts—if it meant getting ahead of me. As for how I ended up in this position… I couldn’t tell myself. My mount moved so fast that I would have fallen off without my Doll spell. Phantom strings allowed me to just barely redirect my trihorn in the direction I wanted. Even then, I was almost thrown off its back when it leaped over a trench obstacle. I shouted in panic as we crash-landed past the finish line. The crowd erupted into cheers, though none louder than Huehuecoyotl, who had bet on my victory. “Yes, yes, yes!” The old coyote jumped out of the stands and rushed to my side to congratulate me. A wealth of new golden rings glittered on his fingers. “You’ve done it, Iztac! One to five odds, and you still did it!” “Are you…” I didn’t truly breathe in the Underworld, and yet I found myself gasping for air. I fell to my mount’s side on the cold, hard ground, staring at the rainy sky. “Are you happy yet?” Huehuecoyotl scratched the back of his head, studied me thoroughly, and then delivered his judgment. “Nope!” He snapped his fingers. “But I know what would do it now, though!” There was a porphyry spire in Mictlan that offered the most “romantic” view of the Market of Years. Getting safe access to the roof cost me a whole hour of constant flights to bribe the guards. I would do anything for my “boyfriend’s” sake. The sight from the roof gave me pause, though. I didn’t notice until then, but what I mistook for a chaotic maze of tents, shops, and stalls was in truth a carefully organized tapestry in the shape of an impossibly large human heart. The endless lines of visitors flowed through fossilized arteries like living blood. How and why the city’s merchants organized themselves to achieve such a feat escaped me. The market included thousands of participants; they couldn’t have all synchronized so perfectly. I would have greatly enjoyed watching the day unfold with Eztli at my side. It would have been quite an entertaining date. But who needed a girl when I could share a moment with Huehuecoyotl and his wonderful personality? “Fascinating, isn’t it?” Huehuecoyotl asked at my side. The two of us stood near the roof’s edge, with nothing but a wide, open void to surround us. The ground many hundred feet below called out to anyone glancing at it to fall to their death. “These dead aren’t sleeping yet, but they’re already part of the city.” What was my line again? Since I forgot, I decided to improvise. “I find it inspiring,” I replied softly as I observed the crowds of customers travel through the market, their words and songs giving life to Mictlan. “This is a living, beating heart.” “Your presence makes me miss mine.” Huehuecoyotl sent me a longing, mischievous gaze. “It would pound louder than a drum right now if I still lived.” How could he say those words without dying of shame? Did they ever work on anyone? “Huehue…” My gaze lost itself in his shining eyes. “I didn’t bring you here just to admire the view.” Huehuecoyotl pretended to be surprised. “You did not?” “You must have noticed by now. All these gazes we shared, the way my hands brushed yours…” It hurt my throat to say something so stupid. “I… I…” Huehuecoyotl covered his mouth with both hands. “Oh, Iztac…” “I…” I mustered all of my strength, all my willpower, all of my bravery, and then uttered the dreaded three words. “I… love you.” Huehuecoyotl gasped in shock and surprise. I couldn’t say whether he was faking it or if he felt genuinely impressed that I would actually go through with this mad scheme of his. His hands moved to his chest, as if to prevent his nonexistent heart from escaping his empty ribcage. “Oh, Iztac… This… This is too much…” I concurred. How did I ever let him talk me into this roleplay nonsense? The things I did for infinite magical power… “I had no idea…” Huehuecoyotl swooned like a maiden in love. “I think I could die satisfied now if I weren’t dead already.” I held back a breath of relief and smiled. The torture was almost over. “Have I made you happy at last?” Huehuecoyotl joined his hands together and regained some measure of composure. “I’m touched, truly, and I believe we’ve built a special connection. However…” My smile faded away. “However, I believe one needs more than love to be truly happy,” the shameless coyote bastard said. “You know what the void in my soul is missing? A luxury boat⁠—” The flame within my chest erupted as I shapeshifted into a vengeful owl. I was too angry to string a single sentence together, so I simply shrieked. “Hey, hey, no need to bring talons into this!” Huehuecoyotl protested as I took a menacing step in his direction. “You know the rules, right?! No violence!” I stopped for a few seconds, just long enough to figure out a loophole. I activated the Doll spell and targeted his legs. “Wait, wait, what are you—” I caused Huehuecoyotl’s knees to fail him before he realized the danger. “Ah!” I watched Huehuecoyotl stumble off the roof with grim satisfaction, then I peeked into the void to watch the fall. His screams of fear and panic were music to my ears. And what to say of that delectable feeling that warmed my innards as he became smaller and smaller? I now understood what hawks felt when they dropped prey from above. Considering how annoying this swindler had turned out to be, I half-expected Queen Mictecacihuatl to congratulate me if Huehuecoyotl actually hit the ground. Still, he didn’t deserve to die twice. That would have been too easy after all the ridiculous nonsense he put me through today. So I dived after him, caught up to him in an instant halfway through the spire’s length, and grabbed his shoulders with my talons. “Oh, thank the gods!” Huehuecoyotl let out a short-lived sigh of relief. “I knew you wouldn’t let me—AH!” I carried the coyote perilously close to the stalls, narrowly moving out of harm’s way whenever my prey was a single hair away from crashing into an obstacle. The poor fool struggled against my grip as we made our way toward the canals. I flew so close to the water that Huehuecoyotl’s feet briefly touched the surface. It only made him grip me tighter in his panic, which I found deeply amusing. “You want a boat?!” I asked my prey with a joyful tone. “Here, take your pick!” We slalomed among surprised boatmen and narrow waterways, narrowly dodging wooden prows and bone-bridges. Boatmen stopped their skiffs dead in their tracks as we flew past them, while skeletal passengers ducked down to avoid a collision. Huehuecoyotl screamed like a child from start to finish. When I finally grew tired of carrying the swindler around, I slowed down and tossed him along a stone walkway. Huehuecoyotl lay face-down on a road of paved bones, kissing the safe ground he had taken for granted. “Ah…” he rattled, catching his nonexistent breath. “Ah…” “Had enough?” I asked the old coyote as I landed at his side. I didn’t shapeshift back into a man, in case I had to give him a second tour. “Otherwise, I can take you outside the walls too.” “Ah…” Huehuecoyotl rolled on his back like a dog whose belly demanded a good rubbing. His fearful rattle turned into a bellowing, joyful sound. “Aha!” Of the ways he could have answered, I did not expect laughter. I watched on, mesmerized, as Huehuecoyotl laughed his ass off. He rolled left to right on the ground while holding his ribs. “Oh my, that was…” He recovered enough of his composure to rise back up. “That was great.” I glared at him and expanded my wings. “Clearly, I haven’t tried hard enough.” “Wait, wait!” Huehuecoyotl waved his hands at me so fast that I could feel a breeze on my feathers. “I’m serious, that was great!” “Then teach me your damn spell!” I snarled, at my wit’s end. “All you’ve done so far is exploit me for cheap tricks!” I had wasted most of the night on Huehuecoyotl’s insane demands. They started innocently enough, like an aerial sightseeing tour of Mictlan or singing, but then escalated to participating in races all the way to declaring my undying love for the old coyote. Eztli would have mocked him for the last one. Having been bullied and the target of pranks in the past, I had grown thick skin over the years. Don’t let the laughs get to you. I was ready to swallow my pride for the sake of learning magic. A beekeeper couldn’t harvest sweet honey without exposing themselves to stingers. Yet Huehuecoyotl still managed to exhaust my patience. “Hey, hey, come on, don’t say that, Iz. Can I call you Iz?” That cursed swindler had the audacity to look wounded. “I wasn’t exploiting you; I was teaching you.” I held back the urge to peck him to death. “Teaching me what? I fulfilled all your requests and I’m still nowhere near close to learning the Veil spell.” “My poor Iztac, that’s where you’re wrong.” Huehuecoyotl chuckled at my angered glare. I had to admire his bravado if nothing else. “What’s the greatest quality for a Veil user?” “A complete and utter lack of shame?” “Come on, I’m serious.” Huehuecoyotl crossed his arms and looked at me as if I were an unruly child. “What’s a Veil user’s best quality in your mind?” Had I intimidated him into giving me a morsel of knowledge? Though it demanded great willpower to contain my rage, I decided to play along. “Creativity?” “Your answer proves you don’t have any. As a reward for this night of pleasure, I will tell you the answer.” Huehuecoyotl wagged his finger at me. “It’s selflessness.” “Selflessness?!” The nerve of this shameless fool… unbelievable. “Take a look at yourself. You don’t have a single selfless bone in your body.” “So cold and aloof… Let me ask you a riddle⁠—” “No,” I said impatiently. “Oh wait, let me ask you one of mine—who is the old dog who’s about to be dumped off Mictlan’s walls if he doesn’t give me what I want in the next five minutes?” “I’m not giving you what you think you want, Iztac.” Huehuecoyotl shook his head. “I’m giving you what you need.” And now he tried to sound wise and mysterious. Wonderful. Still, he did sound halfway serious… “Imagine a woman, a beautiful woman, vain and difficult,” Huehuecoyotl said. “Though it can be a man too if you want, I don’t discriminate⁠—” “Get to the point,” I cut in. “Fine, fine. A vain woman says she wishes to look at her own reflection. The most faithful one, she says. So she commissions two craftsmen to help. The first offers her a mirror—the most polished mirror in the world that shows her exactly as she is, wrinkles and all. The second, an artist, draws a painting that presents her at her best, with smooth skin and a wonderful smile. Which of the two craftsmen is the most selfless?” I pondered the question for a few seconds before coming up with the answer. “The mirror-maker, because the mirror reflects the woman as she is and not as the artist imagines her to be.” Huehuecoyotl’s teeth morphed into a pleased smirk. “Wrong!” “Wrong?” Now I felt a little confused. “Is it not selfless to tell the truth?” “You haven’t noticed the key detail,” Huehuecoyotl chastised me. “The woman is vain. She says she wants to see her truthful reflection, and she may even think she does… but deep down, what she truly desires is that fleeting feeling of vainglorious contentment. While the mirror-maker didn’t bother understanding his customer, the artist guessed her true desire and fulfilled it.” Her true desire? I pondered Huehuecoyotl’s words and tried to discern what his parable meant. Did it somehow relate to what happened tonight? The old coyote is a trickster. Were his demands not mere whims but lessons in disguise? Huehuecoyotl agreed to teach me the Veil spell if I made him happy. It took me a moment to realize why I had failed. All along, I simply went along with what he said or thought he wanted rather than what he needed. “You don’t know yourself,” I guessed, “what would make you happy. That’s why you’re coming up with all these stupid pranks.” “Does anyone?” Huehuecoyotl laughed at me. “Everyone is a slave to something, Iztac. Few, however, are willing to accept it. So they bury their shameful feelings under mountains of lies and moral justifications. A man says he kills for his nation and may even believe it. But if his country were to collapse, he would turn into a bandit in a heartbeat, because murder is not a means to an end for him; it is the end.” I finally caught on. “A true Veil user must understand their target better than they know themselves.” “Now you’re getting it.” Huehuecoyotl patted me on the wing with a sleazy grin. “The secret of life is that most people don’t know what their heart truly wishes to see. The best illusions show it to them.” “Why didn’t you just tell me that?” I snapped at him. My time in the sleeping world was awfully limited. “You could have spared us hours of work!” “It wasn’t ‘work,’ my slow-witted beautiful bird; it was a fun lesson,” Huehuecoyotl cackled happily. “Nobody upstairs will ever tell you what they truly want because half the time, they don’t even know it themselves. A heart’s desire is a secret treasure you must excavate with your wits and your bare hands.” The old Nahualli put his hands behind the back of his head. “I still don’t feel all too peachy by the way,” he teased me. “You’re getting there, Iz, but I still need a little push to achieve true bliss.” A wave of anger and frustration surged through my spine. He still wasn’t satisfied after everything? No, wait, this is a test. I mellowed out a bit after figuring this out. He gave me a hint to solve his riddle. We had gone through so many activities, yet never once did Huehuecoyotl laugh. Only when I threatened his unlife did he actually appear to enjoy himself. Did this old coyote enjoy being threatened? After mulling over our latest adventure, the gears in my head turned. No. He didn’t look too pleased when I threw him off the spire. He was laughing when I asked him to teach me his spell too. I studied Huehuecoyotl without a word, and he grinned back at me. This man was a griefer, a daredevil, and a trickster. He seemed to find joy in annoying me, but I knew true bullies. I would never forget the laughter of my classmates when they tossed me into a sanitary pit. Huehuecoyotl wasn’t a cruel man. He never laughed at what he had put me through today. He did not annoy me for its own sake. He struck me as a curious dog, constantly poking a turtle to see how it would react. The truth hit me like a stone in the face. He likes being surprised. Huehuecoyotl only laughed when I took him aback. He enjoyed the unexpected. But what would surprise a legendary trickster enough for him to feel bliss? A joke of legendary proportions, no doubt. A divine prank. “Eh…” I chuckled to myself. “I understand now.” “You do?” Huehuecoyotl started violating my personal space again, his hands rubbing against my feathers. “You’re finally going to take me to your secret love nest?” “Who knows?” I grabbed him with my beak, the way a mother dog would carry a puppy, and tossed him onto my back. Being a giant owl did wonders for my neck’s flexibility. “You’ll have to see and find out.” It was time to kill two birds with one stone, as they said. “I was wondering how you were doing, Iztac,” Queen Mictecacihuatl greeted me as we landed in her husband’s court. The ashen plaza dampened the sound of my flapping wings into near silence. “Have you come to train with me?” “Very soon, oh Queen of the Underworld.” I dumped Huehuecoyotl onto the ground before bowing before Mictecacihuatl. “I have come to pay your husband his due.” “Iz, you didn’t tell me you had friends in low places!” Huehuecoyotl dusted off his clothes and smiled at Mictecacihuatl. “Oh my queen, how beautiful you are tonight! But then again, you are always beautiful. How’s your husband treating you?” Mictecacihuatl ignored the trickster utterly. She didn’t even spare him a single glance. “I warned you that he would be insufferable, Iztac.” “The tales did not do him justice,” I replied with a sigh. “Did you mean that as a criticism or a compliment?” Huehuecoyotl nagged me. “Because it sounds intentionally vague.” Taking a leaf from Mictecacihuatl’s book, I shapeshifted back into a man without answering him. The bag I bought from the Market of Years fit me in any form. I opened its contents and unfurled the old, dusty map inside. “Oh great Queen of the Dead,” I pleaded with Mictecacihuatl. “I beseech thee to grant me an audience with King Mictlantecuhtli.” “Your request is granted.” Was that a flicker of amusement I saw in her eyes when she studied my map? She appeared to have guessed my plan. “I shall offer a warning. If you cannot deliver my husband’s tribute, do not expect a third audience.” Her tone gave me pause. “Because King Mictlantecuhtli will not answer another demand, or because he will annihilate me?” The queen’s silence was an answer in itself. How worrying. “I would like for Huehuecoyotl to witness the audience,” I asked her. “Poor old me?” Huehuecoyotl gasped in false shock. “Aww, I knew you cared.” Mictecacihuatl stared at the trickster with a look of utter annoyance. “So long as he does not speak a word,” she decided. “Otherwise, I shall smite him to dust.” “My, the thought of being manhandled by a goddess fills me with—mmmm!” Huehuecoyotl’s jaw snapped shut on its own, much to his annoyance. It took me a moment to notice the near-invisible strings binding his maw to Mictecacihuatl’s hand. “Mmmm!” “In time, Iztac, you will understand the main advantages of the Doll spell,” Mictecacihuatl mused. “Silence.” Like any good teacher, she understood how to motivate her students. With Huehuecoyotl reduced to a silent spectator, I knelt among the ashes as Mictecacihuatl petitioned her mountain of a husband to grant me an audience. “The young Tlacatecolotl has returned, my king.” For a long, agonizing minute, it seemed as if the goddess’s appeal had fallen on deaf ears. However, I had grown more attuned to the invisible energies that pervaded the Underworld across my multiple journeys. A foreboding sensation filled the cold, dead air. A subtle pulse coursed through the ground as if heralding an incoming earthquake. The shadow that King Mictantecuhtli’s colossal skull cast over me lengthened until it engulfed the entire plaza. Even the carefree Huehuecoyotl crawled onto the ground and did his best to look small. Ethereal stars lit up inside Mictlantecuhtli’s empty eye sockets. Their eldritch radiance put the fire in my chest to shame and dimly illuminated the darkness. A terrible silence swallowed all noise, for the god tolerated no other sound than his own whispers. “Your heartbeat quickens, little bird.” Mictlantecuhtli’s words sounded no louder than falling raindrops, yet they carried the weight of an ocean. “Are you afraid?” Of course I was afraid. My experience with the Nightlords had strengthened my will, and I believed I had found a solution to the god’s request, but I was still an ant trying to bargain with a giant. Mictlantecuhtlu could wipe me out of existence with a stray thought. To dare presume how he would react was folly. The god might be bound to follow his word, but nothing would prevent him from crushing me afterward if I somehow annoyed him. My only hope was to be as polite and deferential as possible in the hope he wouldn’t punish me later. “Only the mad would not fear you, Your Majesty,” I replied, trying to find the most diplomatic words possible. “My immortal soul is at your mercy.” “It is. You would have been wiser to learn patience and never return.” There was no anger or annoyance in Mictlantecuhtli’s voice. I did not think the god was capable of such emotion. Death felt nothing. “You kneel before me once more, yet I see no ocean of blood outside my walls. Have you come to me without a tribute?” Now was the moment of truth. I gathered all of my courage, invited the frosty air of the Underworld into my throat and body, and then laid my map on the ground. “There aren’t enough bodies above ground to satisfy Your Majesty’s demand,” I replied, my voice no louder than a whisper. “So I shall shed the offering myself.” I raised my left arm and bit into my own veins. I gnawed at my own flesh until my teeth reached a thick liquid. A metallic, rancid taste filled my mouth. “This is the world.” I raised my bleeding arm over the map. “And this… is the ocean.” Drops of my blackened blood fell onto the map and filled the Boiling Sea’s drawing. The warm liquid flowing through my veins, the last vestige of life one could carry into the Land of the Dead Suns, flowed out of my veins and onto the paper below. It painted the drawn oceans with a dark crimson hue. “I have brought the tribute you asked for, oh great king of the Underworld.” I grabbed the map and presented it to Mictlantecuhtli. I lowered my head in submission and prayed to all gods who would listen to spare my life. “An ocean of blood.” Huehuecoyotl watched the scene with a hint of muffled laughter, his jaw too tightly bound for him to express his amusement. Queen Mictecacihuatl joined her hands together, her back as straight as an arrow. Her husband answered how I expected him to. “I am not impressed.” Mictlantecuhtli found my offering wanting. “This is not what I asked for.” I was warned he would try to haggle. Gods were bound by the letter of their word, not its spirit. “This is the Boiling Sea, an ocean that stretches across the east,” I insisted. “You asked for an ocean of blood.” “This is naught but a puddle bound by ink.” I believed Mictlantecuhtli was incapable of emotion, but I detected a hint of annoyance in his words. “Cunning is the lowest form of intelligence, little bird, and no substitute for hard work.” No amount of hard work would let me fulfill this task, Your Majesty. You asked for the impossible. Thankfully, Queen Mictecacihuatl came to my rescue. “My king did request an ocean of blood,” she pointed out. “Cunning might be the lowest form of intelligence, but it is intelligence nonetheless. Shouldn’t it be rewarded?” “Wisdom is to be honored,” Mictlantecuhtli replied coldly. “I do not find his wit worthy of a reward.” I was losing him. “You promised me sun’s embers for my gift.” An invisible weight fell upon my shoulders, so great that I dared not look up at Mictantecuhtli. I froze in anticipation, my tribute raised by my trembling hands, the flame within my chest flickering with dread. “I gave my word, and I shall grant your request once you offer me a worthy price.” Mictlantecuhtli let out a rattle that shook the very earth beneath my feet. “There is more than enough blood above my gray city to fill an ocean. Return to me with a proper harvest or not at all.” A harvest. The word brought me back to that fateful night when the Nightlords crowned me atop their sinister pyramid. They had harvested a bounty of their own—thousands of skulls and lakes of blood—and then asked me to provide another after enslaving me. I felt the same fury I did back then and the terribly painful sting of injustice. So great was my anger that I briefly forgot I was facing a god. “I refuse.” The two words escaped my mouth on their own, and a terrible silence followed. Two eyes, each larger than the Blood Pyramid, gazed at me impassibly. Not a single sound would escape from Mictantecuhtli’s ancient teeth. Huehuecoyotl had frozen in place, too frightened to even move. Queen Mictecacihuatl stared at me in shock. I am dead. I won’t leave this city alive. Queen Mictecacihuatl attempted one last-ditch attempt to rescue me. “My king⁠—” “Let the bird sing.” The world around me slowly darkened. Mictantecuhtli’s shadow thickened until a blanket of blackness obscured everything—his queen, Huehuecoyotl, the map, the very ground beneath my feet. I could hardly see my own arms. I should have begged for mercy… but I did not. My heart-fire remained resolute, and no fear clouded my mind. In fact, the knowledge that I would be smote to dust freed me in a way I couldn’t properly explain. I was done begging arrogant gods for mercy. I felt the same way back atop the Blood Pyramid. I no longer care if I die, so long as I do not submit. I rose to my feet and held Mictlantecuhtli’s gaze. “Even if I had the power to kill all life on the surface and fill your realm with their blood, oh Great King of the Dead, I would have denied your wish,” I said with a steady voice and an unflinching back. “No god who demands that I kill in his name is worthy of my devotion. “ Mictantecuhtli’s silence was infinitely more threatening than his words. But I did not back down. “I came to you to save my soul and those of my people,” I said. “You asked me to do an impossible task, and I tried to carry it through to the best of my ability. If that is not enough for you, if you would rather delight in our suffering, then too bad. My blood is the only one you will ever get.” The darkness thickened further. Only the god’s starry eyes and my own Teyolia heart-fire pierced this nightly veil, and the latter brought me little protection from the chilling cold of my incoming death. “There are fates far worse than being stuck in a pillar, little bird.” “Then go ahead,” I replied defiantly. “Lock me up in a fire pit, return me to the dust from which I came, eat my soul, and spit it out. My answer will be the same.” I would not betray my vow. “I refuse.” My promise echoed in the darkness. No other sound followed in its wake. Neither the great lord of the dead nor I said a word. How much time did we spend like this, mute and still? Minutes? Hours? It felt like forever to me. All I knew was that I didn’t break the silence. “This is new.” The ghostly light in Mictlantecuhtli’s eyes increased until it rivaled the northern star. “I have witnessed the first dawn and shall bury the last. But in all these centuries, no bird has ever been mad enough to challenge me.” Perhaps I was mad indeed, and doubly so for doubling down. “There is a beginning for all things.” “On that, we agree, Iztac Ce Ehecatl.” I blinked in surprise. Mictantecuhtli never bothered to use my name before, for the fleeting lives of mortals were not worth remembering. “I will grant you access to the fourth sun’s ashes and to my Gate of Tears.” I heard Mictlantecuhtli’s words but struggled to understand them. “Know, however, that once your Teyolia tastes a god’s embers, no other sustenance will satisfy its pyre.” The news should have come as a relief, but the tension in the air sucked all the joy out of my heart. “You… You are not slaying me?” “Not today.” Mictlantecuhtli did not bother to elaborate on the reason behind his whim. “Gods are greater than men. When we stumble, the earth splits open and the stars fall from the sky. Our power will magnify everything within you. Look upon thy heart and see what lies within.” I gazed at the purple fire burning within my chest. The Parliament of Skulls called it an accursed flame that brought chaos and disorder. Its baleful, unnatural embers glowed even in the Mictlantecuhtli’s shadow. “Darkness cannot create light, Iztac Ce Ehecatl,” Mictlantecuhtli warned me. “Spite feeds your heart’s fire, and pride fuels it. A sun born from your chest will spread chaos and torment rather than comfort.” I recovered enough from my shock to answer. “Good,” I muttered. “May my heartfire wreak havoc on the false gods above.” “Your impatience blinds you to the price you will pay for this power,” Mictlantecuhtli whispered, each of his words heavier than stone. “This has happened before.” I struggled to understand the god’s words for a moment. “This… has happened before?” “You tread on a path many others walked before you. One travels further ahead, and another reached the end long ago.” Mictlantecuhtli let out a terrible rattle that shook my very bones. “The power you seek ruined every single one of them.” “I…” I cleared my throat and tried to put my thoughts in order. “I understand the risks involved, but I have no choice but to try anyway.” “The wise would turn away from this madness. You will find only pain beneath my gray city. Whatever darkness you hope to purge from the living world will pale before what you will find underground…” Mictlantecuhtli marked a short pause, as if he were hesitating to say more. “And what you will bring back with you.” I knew, deep within my bones, that this was my last opportunity to turn back. That I stood on some invisible threshold. Whatever bridge led me to this moment would collapse behind me once I took a step forward. I had been warned of what awaited me underground—ancient terrors buried by the gods, secrets best left forgotten, stillborn worlds, forsaken creations of the heavens… and my mother, whom all seemed to dread. Whatever deity sired the vampire curse crawled out of those depths. Perhaps another warlock brought it back after a poorly-thought dive into the dark. But none of the dead horrors below could match what I had seen among the living—an empire built on rivers of blood and towers of skulls that slowly swallowed the world piece by piece, that forced mothers to whore out their own daughters as breeding slaves and turned their sons into tools of war; a curse that corrupted the living and denied the dead their rest; a cruel system that spread war to the innocents and the guilty alike; a world that saw me only as a piece of meat bound to die on an altar of lies and falsehood. Whatever price I had to pay, Yohuachanca needed to go. “I cannot turn back now, Your Majesty,” I whispered with determination. “For my sake and that of many others.” Necahual, Eztli, Ingrid… So many would suffer a gruesome fate if I failed now. I could not let the chain of pain gain another link. Mictlantecuhtli, the great King of the Underworld and God of the Dead, accepted my answer. “So be it.” “But why?” I dared to ask. “Why let me try?” “Curiosity.” Huehuecoyotl taught me that I should try to understand what others truly wanted to better cast them under a Veil. When I tried to understand the reason behind Mictlantecuhtli’s change of heart, the answer appeared obvious to me. The old god had witnessed the birth of the current universe and those who preceded it. By defying him openly, I had gained his interest and now he wished to see if I would succeed where so many other warlocks had failed. The gods created mortals in their image. The lord of the dead wasn’t so different from his subjects. They both sought an escape from their boredom. A purple pillar of sunlight fell upon Mictlantecuhtli’s obsidian crown and illuminated the darkness. I recognized the dim radiance of Chalchiuhtlicue’s sun. One of her tears spilled from above—not a drop of purple rain, but a small flame no larger than my fist. While its outer layer was as purple as Mictlan’s rain clouds, its core shone with the color of bright jade. Watching it filled me with a vague sense of anguish and comfort—a strange sensation that, though the world was full of dread, someone, somewhere, shared my pain. I slowly seized the flame within my hands and sheltered it within my palms. The fire did not burn me. A single breeze could snuff it away. These were fragile embers, the flickering tears of a dead sun. And yet… I felt the subtle power radiating from the fire. A magic greater than any spell, more subtle than the Veil, and stronger than the Doll. A miracle that, if cultivated, would burn away all my enemies. I did not hesitate. I slipped Chalchiuhtlicue’s embers through my skeletal ribcage. My Teyolia feasted on the goddess’s fire. The divine spark fiercely ignited my Teyolia until its purple flames turned green. Visions flashed into my eyes, and anguished screams echoed into my skull. I saw a wall of water taller than monsters swallowing cities of gold under the waves. A flood of despair swept away battlefields and carried away screaming warriors and begging slaves alike. I cried tears of anguish that drowned the world in desolation as I shared in a goddess’s pain and grief. But then came the power. A pulse of magic coursed through my veins, filling me with both terrible pain and indescribable pleasure. My bones were set ablaze from within. The accursed flame consumed the goddess’s jade and turned it purple. Her sorrow burned like oil to fuel the fire of my soul. The same thrill that possessed me once I took my first flight returned, stronger, sharper, and more focused. My vision changed from a flooded, doomed world to a pyramid of bloodsoaked corpses. I flew on jet-black wings and heralded the coming of a night from which the very stars recoiled. Screeching bats announced my arrival. Skulls whispered my name, though I could no longer understand it. I was the hungry death, the devourer of dawn. I can do anything. I thought, no, I knew. I could lift mountains and boil oceans. I could lift the sky and cast the stars down to earth. I… I… I was a god for one moment and a mortal the next. The blissful thrill came crashing down like a receding wave. The surge of divine power swiftly weakened, and its sudden absence returned me to reality. I knelt on ashen ground, my trembling hands grasping at nothing. Mictlantecuhtli’s shadow had receded, returning the world to normal. The visions and memories I experienced vanished like fleeting dust in the wind. My chest felt warmer, though. I glanced at my ribs. The purple brazier within it had grown and brightened enough to spill from my chest. Searing heat coursed through my bones. The Underworld’s cold no longer troubled me. The flame within my heart burned too strongly for death to dim it. I felt Mictecacihuatl’s astonished gaze upon my back, and that of Huehuecoyotl too. But I paid them no mind. Not even King Mictlantecuhtli’s overwhelming aura could disturb me. A single thought occupied my mind at the exclusion of everything else. More. More fire. part0017. 12A TASTE OF HELL Fire coursed through my veins. The wound I had inflicted on my arm for Mictantecuhtli’s tribute oozed with a dead sun’s curse. My blood, once black and dry, now burned like oil once it escaped my veins. Raging purple flames arose from it when it spilled onto the ground. I could feel their hunger and spite, their all-consuming desire to spread and burn everything that came within their reach. The fire did not consume my flesh, however, far from it. It flowed over my skin and my feathers harmlessly, sliding along them like water’s flow, filling me with a sense of comfort and confidence. I watched the fire lick my fingers with fascination, unable to turn my eyes away from it. “Iztac.” It took a goddess calling out my name to shake me from my trance. I returned to reality to find Queen Mictecacihuatl looking over me with what could pass for concern. Huehuecoyotl stood behind her, arms crossed and eyes cautious. I struggled to recognize my surroundings for a moment. We had been taken underground—if such a word carried any meaning in the Land of the Dead Suns—in what appeared to be ancient catacombs. The walls, built from skulls etched in obsidian, made for a haunting sight. Droplets of water rained from the ceiling, warm and salty to the touch. What happened? The sound of my footsteps echoed on drenched stones. Was I so fascinated by my own flame that I simply followed them along like a sleepwalking slave? “Where are we?” “Beneath my husband’s city, in the catacombs beneath Mictlan,” Queen Mictecacihuatl reminded me. “You have gained access to the Gate of Tears and the third world’s corpse.” “I…” I cleared my throat, trying to figure out how I got there. “I do not remember much.” The Underworld’s queen observed me warily. Was that a note of concern I detected in her ancient eyes? “Beware, Iztac,” she warned me. “Your Teyolia has grown stronger, but a mishandled flame will consume its wielder. If you do not tame your power, you will become a slave to it.” “This power is me,” I replied. Mictecacihuatl shook her head, crushing my hopes. “Until you master it, you will only be borrowing Chalchiuhtlicue’s strength. It will take discipline for you to make it your own.” I half-expected Huehuecoyotl to make a joke at my expense, only to realize the old warlock was silent as a tomb. Had my audience with Mictlantecuhtli spooked him into caution? I did survive a god’s anger and feast on the remains of another... I glanced again at my hand, this time resisting the lure of my flame. The queen was right; I couldn’t let it distract me. “Is my blood truly burning?” “Yes,” Mictecacihuatl said. “The effects will not be as visible in the world of the living, but your blood now carries the power of a dead sun. A vampire drinking it might as well be consuming a cup of poisoned water.” Good. Anything that ruined these parasites’ feast put more oil in my burning heart. “Would it kill them too?” I asked. The idea of my tormentors burning from the inside upon tasting the blood they so desperately craved filled me with glee. “Will it burn them to ashes?” “Not yet,” Queen Mictecacihuatl replied. “Your blood will burn the Nightkin like burning oil sears a mortal’s flesh, but the Nightlords are old and strong. Your blood will not slay them like their weaker kin.” Disappointing, but not unexpected. I had consumed a dead sun’s embers. My blood didn’t yet carry the vitality and heat of a living one. I needed more fuel to turn my heart into a charnel pit. “However…” Queen Mictecacihuatl considered the matter a moment before offering advice. “Your blood might weaken the Nightlords if they consume it. The fire will course through their veins as it does through yours, but it shall harm them from within. It will distract them for a short time.” So if I could trick a Nightlord into consuming my blood before a battle, it might grant me a chance to destroy them. That might prove more difficult than expected. My blood was meant for the First Emperor’s altar. Like a delicious fermented drink, the Nightlords would only feast on me on the Night of the Scarlet Moon and no sooner. By then, it would be too late to save myself. I would need to trick my tormentors into violating their own ritual. I could only see one Nightlord mad enough to try it. These walls are ancient. We continued our descent. A few skulls belonged to old and ancient beasts such as feathered tyrants or longnecks, but I couldn’t recognize most of them. I passed by the remains of giant beasts with more eyes than I had limbs, the colossal bones of primeval animals, and the coiling remnants of ancient serpents. These creatures died long before our cities were born. The simmering water drops from above drizzled onto the walls. They weren’t purple like the Underworld’s raindrops, but translucent, salty, and ephemeral. “What are those, Your Majesty?” I asked Queen Mictecacihuatl. “Those are not raindrops.” “Both are tears,” the goddess replied calmly. “All tears shed by the dead above make their way down there.” The weight of lifetimes of grief and lamentation compounded into a drizzle underground. I should have felt cold and drenched from it, but I suddenly realized the water turned to salty steam the moment it hit the ground. The air was searingly warm and hot. There is a fire below. A flame that an ocean of tears cannot douse. “Here we are,” Queen Mictecacihuatl declared as we reached the bottom of the fossilized stairs. “The Gate of Tears.” The moment I laid eyes upon it, I realized a title like “Gate of Torment” would have been a more appropriate name. The doorway loomed in the midst of an immense underground chamber. The tears that fell from the ceiling turned to steam the moment they fell from it, filling the room with a pale white mist. A terrifying oval obsidian archway was ablaze with crimson flames illuminating the center. Arcs of crimson lightning crackled from the blazing symbols etched into its surface. An adult longneck could have crossed the portal, but no one would have been mad enough to try, for only pain awaited beyond its threshold. Another world was visible beyond the gate—a hellscape of smoldering ash and rivers of molten rocks. The sky rained not purple tears of sorrow but fireballs and blazing stones. The dreadful stench of sulfur flowed out of the portal alongside a terrible whiff of burning flesh. A translucent veil separated this otherworldly realm of fire from Mictlan, as thin as a curtain of water yet seemingly strong enough to keep the blazing fire out. None of the fires burned as hot as the dreadful sun overlooking the desolation. It was a searing blue as the flames consuming the land were red, the spectral orb floated amidst a sea of smoke and dust. The swirling whirlpool of clouds reminded of a baleful eye glaring down at the world itself. “This is Tlalocan, the House of Tlaloc,” Queen Mictecacihuatl declared, her voice deep and heavy. “The Cinderlands, where the third sun rains fire and the dead burn forever. The second layer of the Land of the Dead Suns.” “A special kind of hell,” the boatman had called it. If only he had known how right he was. I took a few steps forward, closer to the threshold, to peek, but I dared not cross it. The world beyond the gate exuded a sense of overwhelming dread and danger. I noticed ancient ruins and stone towers jutting from deserts of burning sands. Unlike the mismatched crumbling monuments from the first layer, those were clearly the remains of devastated cities. “What…” I gulped, struggling to find my words. This layer’s flames inspired fear in my heart rather than fascination. “What happened here?” “In the third world, the rain god Tlaloc became the sun,” Queen Mictecacihuatl said. “A dispute among the gods led to a terrible drought. Mortals begged King Tlaloc to bring back the rain. One day, their constant prayers were finally answered.” Huehuecoyotl finally broke out of his silence, his voice somber. “King Tlaloc rained fire from the sky in a fit of rage and burned the world to ash.” My eyes darted from the ancient ruins to the baleful blue sun looming over them. Tlaloc’s shining eye still glared at the world he had destroyed eons ago. I dared not imagine what crime could have been great enough to motivate such an apocalypse. The sight of Tlalocan gave me pause. The Underworld’s first layer was the only place safe for the blessed dead. Mictlan was a sanctuary built atop a slumbering volcano. Queen Mictecacihuatl laid a comforting hand on my shoulder. “Do you still wish to carry on with your journey, Iztac?” I glanced at the flame within my chest. It had grown stronger, enough to spill out of my chest a bit. Yet the Nightlords’ marks still coiled around it like chains, binding my very soul. I had made a step forward in my liberation, but it still remained out of reach. The sun within my heart wouldn’t burn a Nightlord to cinders yet. The goddess said as much. I gazed at Tlaloc’s blue sun. Its sinister radiance and power put Chalchiuhtlicue to shame. Seizing its embers, let alone reaching them, would prove a grueling journey, but the fire in my chest would not be denied. It hungered for the power beyond this gate and the freedom it represented. “I cannot turn back,” I answered the goddess. “Not now. Not until I am free.” The goddess accepted my words with a sharp nod and a warning. “This door only opens one way, Iztac.” She stared at the veil separating her realm from Tlalocan. “Once you cross it, you cannot come back.” My stomach—what remained of it in the Underworld—lurched. “I thought a Tlacatecolotl could come and go out of the Underworld?” “There are other paths for a Tlacatecolotl to travel across the layers, but you will have to find them yourself.” Queen Mictecacihuatl waved a hand at the world beyond the gate. “Those Who Remain cannot be allowed to pass into the upper levels.” I squinted at Tlalocan. This burning world looked deader than Mictlan to me. I couldn’t see the shadow of a single skeleton lurking among the ashen sands. “Those Who Remain?” “The third world’s dead linger in the ruins of their lost realms,” Queen Mictecacihuatl confirmed. “The searing flames drove them mad with pain and united them in agony. Should they escape Tlalocan, they will visit their suffering on the peaceful dead and the living above.” I struggled to imagine what could endure in such a hell. The heat and flames should have turned any skeleton to ash by now. Could my mother truly have made her lair in Tlalocan? What comfort could she find in this place? I weighed my options. Venturing into Tlalocan right now seemed like suicide, especially if I couldn’t turn back to seek shelter in Mictlan. The Land of the Dead Suns’ second layer would be most unkind to me. I needed to master my new spells and magic if I hoped to survive it. “My queen, I need more time to prepare for this journey,” I informed Mictecacihuatl. “I humbly ask for a delay.” “Of course.” Queen Mictecacihuatl comforted me with a kind nod. “You have earned the right of passage. You are free to decide when to exercise it. Until then, I shall offer you my guidance.” “I thank thee, oh great queen of the dead.” I bowed in thankfulness. “If it is not too much to ask, I would like to delay our training until I can master the Veil spell. I must learn to hide my strength before I can grow it further.” “A wise choice.” The queen glanced at Huehuecoyotl. “I leave our guest in your care for the time being. Treat him well.” Huehuecoyotl nodded sharply, though his body language screamed how alert he was. “As you wish, Queen Mictecacihualt.” His wary, respectful tone—so unlike the irreverence he had shown the goddess when I asked for an audience with her husband—immediately drew a suspicious gaze from me. That was not normal. “Excellent,” Queen Mictecacihuatl said as she vanished from sight in a cloud of bone dust and obsidian shards. “We shall meet again, Iztac.” The goddess vanished, leaving Huehuecoyotl and me alone on a dead world’s threshold. The dead Nahualli stared at me in utter silence, his gaze that of a wary dog, unsure if he should bolt to safety or hold his ground. “Why aren’t you saying anything, old coyote?” I asked Huehuecoyotl. I took the conman’s eerie quietness as a dire warning. “What is wrong?” Huehuecoyotl appraised me sharply and then asked me a simple question. “What is your mother’s name, Iztac?” I held his stare without a word. “Your silence is answer enough. There is only one name forbidden within Mictlan’s walls. I’m sure our beloved queen knows it too.” Huehuecoyotl’s gaze lingered on my Teyolia. “I should have guessed. You share her ambition.” From his tone, he didn’t mean it as a compliment. “What do you know about my mother?” “More than you, if you feel the need to ask.” Huehuecoyotl met my eyes. “Do you know she tasted our sun’s embers too?” I froze in shock. “You didn’t,” Huehuecoyotl grunted, his breath heavy with resentment. “She bargained with our cunning queen for her magic and outwitted her… then she swindled me too. She was charming company, and I confess to developing a little crush on her, but it didn’t last long.” I found it ironic for a professional griefer to complain about being swindled. “She turned you down?” “She turned me off.” Huehuecoyotl appraised me warily. “I am a cheat and a con, but your mother was a thief of souls and a destroyer of men. She had more ice in her heart than flames.” I glared at him. “I am not my mother.” “I know, which is why I have not run away yet. But I see too much of her in you.” Huehuecoyotl sighed. “Mark my word, my friend. Nothing good will come out of following in her footsteps.” “What footsteps?” I complained, finally at my wit’s end. “What did my mother do to deserve such scorn? I was told she stole souls but no one will give me the details.” “What didn’t she do?” Huehuecoyotl shook his head. “Your mother broke every single rule the afterlife has. She deceived the queen and king for power. She broke into the dead’s homes, shattered their bodies, and stole their skulls to exploit their knowledge. She enslaved souls to suit her needs and destroyed those who wouldn’t serve her. And then, once she had collected a bounty of captured souls…” Huehuecoyotl pointed a finger at the portal and the hellscape beyond it. “She took her prisoners with her to Tlalocan,” he said grimly. “Never to be seen again.” A terrible chill traveled down my spine. “She was a slaver of souls?” “A necromancer, yes. The kind that enslaves the helpless dead to forcibly serve rather than befriend them.” Huehuecoyotl crossed his arms, his eyes lingering on Tlalocan’s burning rain. “Much like you, she seeks to collect the four suns’ embers.” “You tread on a path many others walked before you,” Mictlantecuhtli warned me. “One travels further ahead.” “For what?” I asked, desperate for any morsel of information. Huehuecoyotl answered with a shrug. “For power, what else?” “You don’t know that,” I insisted, trying to find an excuse for my mother’s behavior. “Mayhaps she needs that power to fulfill a noble end.” Much like I was ready to start a war and kill thousands to weaken the Nightlords. Some evils couldn’t be defeated with noble means. “What cause would excuse her crimes?” Huehuecoyotl shook his head. “You will make a poor Veil user if you only look for what you want to see rather than what your heart and mind tell you.” “All I hear is that you cannot tell for certain what my mother plans to do.” I turned my back on him and glanced at the portal. “She’s out there somewhere.” “And you would be wise to avoid her.” “That is for me to decide.” Blood called to blood. I had to know why my mother abandoned me and why she sought the sun’s embers. I needed to know. “Will you help me cross that desert?” “You did make me happy for a brief time, so I will teach you my Veil spell.” Huehuecoyotl shrugged. “But afterward, we shall never meet again. Nothing good will come out of our association.” My blazing fists tightened in anger. Something in his scornful tone deeply offended me. So many had used it when they learned about my so-called curse, welcoming me with an open mind before closing their hearts to me. “You are blind to blame me for something another has done, trickster.” “Haven’t you listened, Iztac? A Veil user can tell what’s inside a person’s heart. In your case, anyone can see it.” Huehuecoyotl glanced at the baleful flame within my chest. “Destruction.” We returned to the Market of Years afterward. The catacomb leading to the Gate of Tears apparently connected to multiple areas in Mictlan, the same way sewers drained water from one part of a city to another. I briefly wondered why one would require Mictlantecuhtli’s permission to access it before walls of bones and skulls closed behind us. Mictlantecuhtli was Mictlan. His realm’s geography, the very ground, answered his will. Which made me question how my mother managed to get away with so many crimes undetected. I guessed she must have used the Veil spell to hide herself, which meant not even gods could see through convincing illusions. Even then, she was eventually discovered. I was thankful to Mictecacihuatl for giving me a chance, even though she probably guessed my parentage, although I guessed she only did so to obtain my aid in running the Day of the Dead. Mictlantecuhtli might not have cared who my mother was, but the Queen of the Underworld certainly did. She treated me as my own person rather than another’s inheritor. True to his word, Huehuecoyotl decided to do our lesson at his tent. “Let me ask you a question, my young disciple,” he said as we sat around his divination table. “When a vampire opens your veins, what does it want to see?” The question hit a bit too close to home for comfort. “Blood.” “Burning blood?” Huehuecoyotl slouched in his chair, his feet on the table and his hands behind his head. “Or a warm red liquid that they take for a delicious delicacy.” Was that a trick question? I tried to divine the meaning behind his words and remembered his words about a heart’s desire. “They want to see normalcy,” I guessed. “What they expect to see.” “Exactly.” Huehuecoyotl briefly clapped. It seemed he was back to his old, playful self now that we had left the catacombs. “Humans, vampires, everyone, when we see an open wound, we expect blood to pour out of it. Fruity red blood. Because if the blood was blue, or if dust poured out of your veins, then it means something is wrong, and the mind doesn’t want to spend energy on figuring out what’s truly going on.” The same way the villagers reacted to me when they saw my hair and eyes. I was different, and different felt either interesting or unsettling. “What you’re saying is that the best illusions are those that look mundane.” “You catch on quickly.” Huehuecoyotl raised his arms in a wide, flamboyant gesture. “Look.” I observed carefully as the dead trickster’s power unfolded before my eyes. Huehuecoyotl only made his power’s activation visible to me as kindness—I’d seen him project illusions without any obvious signs—but it proved enlightening. Simmering ectoplasm in the shape of a coyote emerged from his dusty bones, pallid and translucent. It grew to encompass Huehuecoyotl entirely. “The Veil spell requires you to expand your Tonalli outside your body,” Huehuecoyotl explained, his features shifting. Flesh grew over his bones, golden eyes filled his empty eye sockets, and his tattered clothes gained a new life. A few seconds later, I found myself facing a handsome man around Guatemoc’s age, albeit one veiled in a coyote aura. “See?” I chuckled. “Was that how you looked when you were alive?” “Mayhaps? I remember being the most handsome man of my time, but my memory has grown fuzzy in my old age.” Huehuecoyotl expanded his Tonalli aura further until it encompassed me. When he spoke up again, his voice grew higher-pitched, as if he were truly alive again. “Like glitterdust, your power ‘colors’ anything within its area of effect, disguising it as something else.” “Hence the Veil name,” I guessed. I studied Huehuecoyotl’s arm. His new skin was smooth and vividly detailed. I noticed the shadow of scars and red spots left behind by old diseases. “This is so… so real.” Unable to resist the temptation, I pinched Huehuecoyotl’s arm. He immediately moaned in pleasure, but I was too surprised by what I felt beneath my fingers to care: warmth, smooth softness, and supple flexibility. Everything that made skin, well, skin. I suddenly realized that Huehuecoyotl had reacted to my pinching attempt. The skin was either real or the illusion gained enough substance to mimic a real one’s properties. “Does this work like Spiritual Manifestation?” I asked the trickster, gobsmacked. “Did you turn your illusions tangible?” “No, no, no.” Huehuecoyotl wagged a finger at me. “The Spiritual Manifestation and Doll spells both require you to physically manifest your Tonalli, either completely or partially. The Veil spell keeps it in its spiritual form.” “Your skin and flesh feel real enough to me,” I pointed out. “Enough that it hurt you when I pinched you.” Huehuecoyotl’s new lips curled into an amused smile. “Did it?” “You faked it?” I asked, squinting in confusion. This liar… “Why? To taunt me?” “Because it’s fun, and because you would expect someone being pinched in the arm to feel pain.” Huehuecoyotl waved a hand at himself, changing the color of his skin to blue. “See? None of what you see is actually there. It’s all make-believe. Spiritual camouflage.” Camouflage. I had seen enough salamanders and other animals in the woods near Acampa to figure it out. “Beasts avoid danger when their skin and fur match the grass among which they hide,” I whispered. “This works the same with illusions?” “Exactly!” Huehuecoyotl clapped at me, as if I were a slow child who had finally answered correctly on a test. It felt patronizing, but I bore it for the sake of knowledge. “The more Veil’s target disbelieves what they see, the more strain it puts on the spell. Inversely, if everything appears as they expect it to be, then their belief strengthens the mirage.” That was why he reacted when I pinched his false skin. Since I expected men of flesh and blood to suffer when harmed, his reaction strengthened my mind’s impression that he had truly returned to life. Which in turn caused my fingers to mistake the flesh and skin for real. How insidious. Still, I noticed a flaw in his reasoning. “Then how do you explain this?” I waved a hand at my teacher’s blue skin. “I know this is an illusion. How can you still deceive me?” “I’m a master of my craft,” Huehuecoyotl boasted. “But even I wouldn’t be able to deceive your senses for hours on end, my gullible disciple.” I ignored the jab. “All I hear is that you can still trick my mind.” “If you have the power, concentration, and mental fortitude. Even then, do you see the sweat on my forehead?” Huehuecoyotl punctuated his words with actual phantom sweat coming off his skin. “In short, the easiest way to use the Veil spell is to use your Tonalli to project a pretty picture of what the target wants to see. Once their mind believes the fake is real, then the senses follow.” Fortunately, my current interest was to keep a low profile, to trick the Nightlords and their servants into believing everything was going as they planned. “I assume it is more difficult to trick groups?” “You would think so, but people are like turkeys. If a troupe follows a crocodile along, the lone crafty hen will doubt her own instincts. Collective belief strengthens an illusion enough to trick even the skeptics.” Huehuecoyotl shrugged. “Of course, if doubts spread through the group, then the spell will put a terrible strain on you.” Thankfully, I did not expect to perform before a crowd. “Can an illusion harm a target?” “Do emotional scars count?” Huehuecoyotl laughed. “Wanna see?” I felt a sharp pain in my right arm, followed by a terrible sense of numbness running from my hand to my elbow. The sensation lasted only a second but caused my head to jerk in the appropriate direction. When I looked at it in alarm, I saw nothing. I froze in astonishment, paralyzed by shock and surprise. Most of my arm was gone, with my black blood now pouring onto the tent’s ground. “Argh!” I snapped in horror and surprise, covering my bloody stump with my left hand. It hurt. It hurt as much as when that foul creature gouged out my eye in the Underworld’s wilderness. I knew it was all an illusion, but the pain felt real enough to me. However, no wound could compare to the sensation of the void where my right arm should have been. My left fingers phased through the spot where my forearm should have been and found only empty air. “It… It can’t be gone…” I pressed on my stump, trying to disbelieve the illusion away. Yet the pain only sharpened, and my missing arm did not reappear. “How… How do you do this?” “Impressed yet?” Huehuecoyotl taunted me, amused by my suffering. “I keep the vanishing head act for the adult crowd.” This couldn’t… Wait. An idea crossed my mind. The illusion had range. I rose from my chair and rushed out of the range of Huehuecoyotl’s aura. The terrible pain wracking my stumped right arm vanished the moment I escaped the old coyote’s power. My missing limb returned alongside all its missing sensations, my left fingers holding on to my elbow. “You bastard…” I grunted in anger. Even the blood I had shed on the ground was nowhere to be seen. “You could have warned me!” “I could have, but the mind becomes easier to trick once it goes into shock. The wonders of confusion and all.” Huehuecoyotl’s aura receded back into his body. His flesh and skin evaporated into nothingness, and his clothes regained their dirty holes and former colors. “Phew, I’m spent.” That spell is terrifying. I thought while studying my right arm. I still half-doubted what my eyes showed me. I could hide in plain sight, torment my enemies with visions, turn cliffs into open fields… Worse, I feared the Nightlords might know it as well. The Jaguar Woman had used the Doll spell to strangle me on the day of my coronation. According to Queen Mictecicuahtl, she used the Veil spell to hide the strings when she used the spell. If one cannot trust their mind, what can they believe in? “Is there a way to protect oneself from illusions? Besides disbelieving it or escaping its range?” “Nope,” Huehuecoyotl said with a chuckle. “Well, I’ve heard of truly obscure spells that allowed necromancers to see the truth in all things, but I’ve never encountered one in my long life and longer afterlife.” I had to pray the Nightlords did not possess one. Even then, I would only use the Veil spell sparingly in their presence. It might be safe to use against their servants, but the risk of discovery was too great for now. “Anyway, my young disciple, now is your turn. Let us begin with a simple test.” Huehuecoyotl pointed at my arm. “Turn that rancid, burning vein-oil of yours into fruity blood.” I nodded sharply, then bit into my arm until droplets of burning blood fell onto the floor. I gathered my breath and summoned the power coursing through my veins. The same instinct that pushed my magic to fully manifest came roaring back, but regular practice helped me rein it in. Chalchiuhtlicue’s embers had strengthened my magic. I could feel it in my bones. The burning blood coursing through my veins carried more power for my Tonalli to call upon. I wondered if it would strengthen my Augury spell too. “That’s good,” Huehuecoyotl whispered. “Give it enough power to expand around you, but not enough to take physical shape.” My Tonalli’s power expanded beyond my body in the shape of a black owl. I carefully prevented it from manifesting physically, like when I transformed, instead focusing on keeping it in a phantasmal state. The aura thickened into a phantom owl of purple fire that encompassed my flesh and skin. “Fascinating,” I muttered while studying my bleeding hand, now wreathed in ephemeral fire. “What if I…” I focused on my fingers, turning them translucent. A terrible pressure swiftly smothered my hand, an invisible weight that my flames fought to push back. I immediately identified the source of my trouble—the skeptic in the room. “Being greedy, are you?” Huehuecoyotl taunted me. “See how much effort I put into entertaining people?” I had to concede defeat and dispel the invisibility illusion. The pressure vanished the moment I let go of it. I had underestimated the difficulty of tricking a trickster. New test. I focused on my hand once again, but this time cloaked my burning blood in a veil of deceit. The flames became invisible to the naked eye, and the fluid regained its black-red hue. I still sensed a pressure coming from Huehuecoyotl, but one far lighter and more manageable than what preceded it. Either the illusion felt more believable, or the trickster made an effort to lie to himself. I could maintain this trick for hours, long enough for the fire in my blood to dry it to dust. Huehuecoyotl’s lessons on finding what the heart truly desired suddenly gained more weight. I could, in theory, try to force an illusion onto my enemies, but the effort it required would quickly exhaust me. Subtler displays would serve me better than grandiloquent spectacles. Beware, Nightlords. I glanced at the fire in my chest. You will never see your pyre coming. I practiced with Huehuecoyotl until I awoke in a woman’s arms. I immediately knew that something was wrong. Ingrid’s hands had never felt so cold. “Did you sleep well, Iztac?” My heartbeat came to an abrupt stop upon recognizing the voice. I slowly raised my head until I found myself face to face with a red-eyed woman of terrifying beauty. I had wished for Eztli and was disappointed. Only now did I realize my mistake. I had strengthened my heart-fire. A flame bound to the Nightlords by their terrifying ritual. “So?” Yoloxochitl smiled sweetly at me, her white teeth sharper than swords. “Is there something you forgot to tell me?” part0018. 13FLOWERS OF EVIL My heart pounded harder than a drum. My sun-blessed blood had turned to ice within my veins. My fingers had grown numb from the nerve-wracking tension, and I could feel the sweat falling off my forehead and onto Yoloxochitl’s arms. I was naked in Ingrid’s bed, alone and defenseless, with a mad Nightlord holding me against her chest as if she wanted to devour me. I could cut the tension in the air with a sacrificial knife. How much did she know? How much did she know? Calm down, Iztac, calm down. I told myself, desperately trying to control my breathing and keep a clear head. Mayhaps she only sensed a slight pulse of my Teyolia. She can’t possibly know about the Underworld, or I would already be bound and caged. I have to assuage her fears without giving anything important away. Say as little as possible⁠— “Why are you shaking, Iztac?” Yoloxochitl’s arms moved to my chest and held me in an unsettling embrace. Her skin was cold, colder than the Underworld. “Could you be afraid of me?” Her kind smile unsettled me more than Tlalocan’s terrifying flames. At least I knew where to stand with the latter. I could hardly predict what Yoloxochitl thought behind that eerie, pleasant face of hers. You must speak in half-truths, Iztac. If she smells a lie, you’re dead. “I am afraid,” I said, wording my words carefully. “You have been kind to me, and I fear I have done something deserving of your scorn.” “Oh, my poor child, no, no, do not say that.” Yoloxochitl held me closer to her, my back on her chest, her lips gently kissing my sweat-drenched cheeks. Another man might have found the gesture sensual, even affectionate, but it only made my skin shiver. “Do you not understand, Iztac? You are perfect as you are.” I let her touch me without reacting much, waiting for it to be over. Yoloxochitl finally released me from her embrace and rose from the bed, her red, flowery dress flowing in her wake like an ethereal veil. “The fault lies with another, Iztac,” she said with a demure smile. “I was told you liked visiting the imperial gardens.” With another? My mind worked furiously to decipher the Nightlord’s words. Does she know about the Parliament of Skulls? “Yes.” “Then let us go for a walk. The dawn is still a good hour away.” She joined her hands and clapped. “Dress your emperor.” Ingrid and Sigrun immediately walked into the bedroom with imperial clothes. Mother and daughter kept their heads down, avoiding both my gaze and that of Yoloxochitl. The Nightlord must have banished them both from their own chambers to keep me to herself. Even the highest-ranked servant submits when the master walks in. My thoughts were grim as my consort and concubine covered my nakedness with a turquoise imperial mantle. Ingrid at least sent me a brief gaze full of worry, though I couldn’t tell if she feared for my safety or her own. Her fate was tied to mine. Her mother wisely acted no different from any slave. Once she had me clothed like a pretty doll, Yoloxochitl invited me to follow her out of Sigrun’s apartments. Neither Ingrid nor her mother followed us. In fact, I immediately noticed the absence of guards of any sort. A Nightlord had no need for protection, but I took the absence of my usual jailers as a dire warning. Is she leading me to the altar? I kept thinking as we walked down the palace’s stairs. Yoloxochitl indeed appeared to lead me toward the gardens, but I couldn’t rule out the possibility that it was all a trap. The fault lies with another? What does that mean? “What do you think of this Ingrid?” Yoloxochitl asked without warning. Her eyes did not smile when her lips did. Did she find a way to blame Ingrid in her madness? I felt like a man walking on a sword’s edge, one step away from cutting myself. “She is…” I tried to find a compliment that wouldn’t arouse the Nightlord’s wrath. “Charming.” “I dislike her,” Yoloxochitl declared, a sneer of disdain spreading on her fair face. “My sister Iztacoatl prefers exotic foreigners as her chosen consorts. All looks and no heart. That Ingrid is an opportunist, much like her own mother. She won’t love you.” “Not like you do, oh goddess,” I replied. I meant it as a jab but managed to word it as a compliment. “You do not need to speak to me so formally, Iztac. We are family now, are we not?” Yoloxochitl gently stroked my hair, as if I were an adorable pet. “You may simply call me Mother.” I would rather have stayed an orphan, but I remembered Huehuecoyotl’s lessons. Yoloxochitl’s heart yearned for unconditional love, not the service and adoration of servants or the obedience enforced in her vampire children. I needed to become the dutiful son—the one who respected his elders and went along with their decisions when needed, but showed enough initiative to argue when needed. If I failed to talk my way out of this, if Yoloxochitl ripped my veins open to see if my blood burned in the open air, I would have to use the Veil, and if it failed to deceive her… I would lose, and my skull would join those of my predecessors, but at least I would fight back. “You need not worry, Mother Yoloxochitl,” I said, hating myself for calling her that at all. From the way her lips curled, she seemed to appreciate the name. “Ingrid might share my bed, but my heart belongs to another.” “Indeed.” Yoloxochitl stopped in the middle of a stair step. Her hand brushed against my chest, slowly and dangerously. “You are a brave child.” I half-expected her nails to sink into my flesh and rip my heart out. I was tempted to activate the Veil and slip away, but I kept enough of my composure to not show a hint of worry. Eventually, Yoloxochitl’s hand traveled down to my navel, stopping short of my more intimate parts. “At least Ingrid’s line has proved fertile. She should give me grandchildren in time. The other consorts possess a good enough constitution too.” Yoloxochitl removed her hand from my robes, much to my relief. “You might not realize it yet, Iztac, but fathering more blessed children is your holiest duty. Your sacred blood must keep flowing. Your seed enriches any soil in which it is planted.” You will harvest none of the blood I sow, oh mother of madness, I promise it to myself. “I shall do my duty, Mother Yoloxochitl.” Yoloxochitl nodded, happy with my answer. “I hope you beget a daughter,” she whispered wistfully. “I will be very gentle when I adopt her.” The terrifying memory of Eztli drinking her father to death flashed in my mind. But this time I imagined a girl with white hair and blue eyes sinking her fangs into a helpless man’s flesh in their place—a daughter I might have one day, and the fate that would await her should the Nightlords have their way. Never. I swore to myself, using all my courage and willpower to hide my true feelings from my captor. I will destroy you first. Yoloxochitl started singing to herself as we stepped into the imperial gardens, blissfully unaware of my silent hatred for her. The tune was slow in its joyful innocence, barely breaking through the gentle night breeze. “She will sing the same way when she leads you to the altar,” the wind ominously whispered into my ear. “In this world of suffering, there is no greater madness than an innocent heart.” For someone called the Flower of the Heart, I doubted Yoloxochitl had one. “I must ask you again, Iztac,” she said as we walked among the orchids, her hand trailing among the petals. “Is there something you forgot to tell me?” Now was the moment of truth. It took all of my willpower to lie to her with a straight face. “I do not remember hiding anything worth reporting to you, Mother.” I could have sworn the orchids’ petals recoiled at my words. Yoloxochitl sent me a strange gaze. Where I expected anger at my lie, I instead found compassion. “My poor child,” she said. “You still do not see? You are better than this.” Would you expect me to discard the sun for you? I thought, struggling to fake innocence. “Mother, forgive me, but I still do not understand you.” “That whore, Necahual,” Yoloxochitl answered. “I know what she has done.” “Necahual?” I stared at Yoloxochitl in utter confusion. She wasn’t here for my Teyolia? “What about her?” Now she looked displeased. “Iztac, you need not lie for her sake.” Has she discovered Necahual’s poison? By now, I was desperately trying to figure out what was going on. My spine stiffened under the tension. Has Sigrun betrayed me? “Yes, Iztac.” Yoloxochitl stroked my cheek in a way that would have felt motherly, if not for the cold edge in her eyes. “I know that ungrateful wench tried to raise her hand against you again.” For a few seconds, I could hardly believe my ears. I was simply so taken aback, my mind so overtaken with fear and anxiety that the idea I might have misunderstood the reason behind Yoloxochitl’s presence seemed utterly absurd to me. I expected the other shoe to drop, for the Nightlord to reveal she knew of my nightly escapade. But when I searched her displeased expression, I could find none of her fury directed at me. She… She doesn’t know about my Teyolia? But the ritual… I don’t… What… The wind whispered a riddle into my ear, “The Father of Night obscures even the brightest stars. Even the sun shall bleed in the final feast.” I hardly understood the cryptic warning, but I figured it meant my secret was safe for now, for whatever reasons. My pounding heart slowed down, and I would have breathed a sigh of relief if not for Yoloxochitl’s next words. “I should have her hand severed,” she said with a dangerous light in her eyes. “Maybe her tongue too.” The tension in my flesh returned. My life was safe, but Necahual’s was now once again on the line. “Mother Yoloxochitl, you were misinformed,” I said, trying to word my supplication in a way that wouldn’t imply any mistake on her part. “This was all but play. I kissed her.” “It did not sound like play from what I heard,” Yoloxochitl insisted. “She tried to slap you with her dirty hand. I would have executed her for less.” And I thanked the gods below that it wasn’t the case. “It was a ploy on my end,” I lied. “I am taking my sweet time tormenting Necahual. I want to slowly put her through the same humiliations she visited upon me.” “Then have her stoned,” Yoloxochitl “helpfully” suggested. “A disobedient slave deserves worse than admonishment.” My fists briefly tightened at the word slave, but this reaction was too subtle for the Nightlord to notice. “It is not her flesh I wish to break,” I argued, “but her spirit.” Yoloxochitl frowned in confusion. “Her spirit?” “She has learned she can no longer raise her hand at me. That she was at my mercy.” That, at least, was true. “I will have her work like the most lowly servant and break her spirit. Only then, once she realizes she is my slave, will I claim her body.” The lie flowed out easily because I believed half of it. Though we had formed an alliance, part of me did enjoy getting back at Necahual for years of abuse. My words sounded good enough that Yoloxochitl squinted at me with slight incomprehension. “I see…” Knowing it wouldn’t take long for her to default back to her inner cruelty, I decided to distract her from Necahual’s fate. “There is another thing I wished to confess, Mother Yoloxochitl.” “Oh?” Yoloxochitl immediately tilted her head to the side, immensely curious. “What secret have you been holding from me, Iztac?” That I am planning your death. “That I wished to thank you for showing me forgiveness and shielding me from your sister’s wrath,” I said, the very words making me want to rip out my own tongue. “So I ordered Ingrid to commission a statue of you.” “Oh, Iztac…” Yoloxochitl’s previous anger immediately vanished, replaced with emotion. My empty gesture appeared to have well and truly moved her. “That is so kind of you…” And more than she deserved. “I wished to keep it a secret, but I believed you might wish to be consulted first.” “I appreciate the gesture, but you did not need to.” She smiled sweetly, her fangs shining in the pale moonlight. “How would you wish to represent me, my child?” Dead and buried. But as Huehuecoyotl so wisely had taught me, she wanted to hear what her heart wanted. “Kindly offering me a helping hand.” “You are wise, Iztac.” Yoloxochitl’s hand moved to her eye to wipe away a tear of blood threatening to form. My words had hit right at home, and Necahual was soon completely forgotten. “Few of the previous emperors understood me as you do.” Her lips got closer to my forehead, kissing me the same way I had seen Necahual kiss her daughter when she offered her a gift. Eztli had always blushed in response; all I could do was suppress a shiver of disgust. A cheap price to spare a life. The more power I gather in the shadows, the quicker I can drag this fiend into the light. “Perhaps…” Yoloxochitl whispered gently. “Perhaps I can show you the real me.” Something in her tone—so rife with sinister, whimsical hopefulness—put ice in my veins. “The real you, Mother Yoloxochitl?” “Like night and day, beauty and ugliness coexist within me. Long have I hoped for an emperor who could appreciate both.” She released her hold on my head, her crimson eyes two red orbs in a sea of darkness. “Do you enjoy gardening, Iztac?” I noticed a subtle change in the environment. The orchids’ petals shifted slightly, even though the night breeze no longer touched them. The herbs beneath my feet shivered like a frightened man’s skin. The flowers’ fragrance gained a terribly familiar metallic edge. Magic. “I worked as a farmer,” I said evasively, struggling not to summon my Tonalli to protect myself from the danger I knew was coming. “So you must be familiar with what it takes to keep a garden alive. A good gardener protects their flowers as if they were their children, for the most beautiful plants in the world are also the most fragile.” Her hand moved to my chin and raised it slightly, so she could look into my eyes. “Much like you, Iztac,” she said. “True beauty blossoms from pain and sorrow.” And as she spoke these words, I caught a glimpse of a shape wriggling beneath her left cheek. A furtive sight similar to a snake lurking beneath a bedsheet or a worm digging below her head and down her neck as the white in her sclera darkened to pitch black. Her hands… I sensed something unnatural lurking in her fingers as she held me, like boiling water waiting to erupt from the ground. What… What's going on? “The roots wriggle beneath the flesh,” the wind whispered ominously. “The flower of madness blooms with murder.” “Come with me, Iztac,” Yoloxochitl whispered ever so gently. She took my hand into her own and invited me to step with her among the flowers. “I will show you my secret garden.” Every primal instinct in my body screamed at me to run away, that something horrifying and unnatural was about to happen. I wanted to listen to them. To invent an excuse not to follow that madwoman into the bushes, where the gods knew what terror she had cooked up for me. But I could not avert my gaze. If I wanted to learn the Nightlords’ weakness, I had to step into the dark. No more than I could flinch from facing the hardships underground. So I followed Yoloxochitl through the imperial gardens. Though we tread the same grounds I visited during the day, the area slowly changed before my eyes. Red, star-shaped flowers I did not recognize bloomed in briar patches. The branches of trees intertwined into an archway, leading us deeper into the vegetation. A tense silence overcame the songs of birds and the droning buzz of bugs. Even the chilly night air grew hot and humid “Our blood carries power, my child,” Yoloxochitl said, her free hand brushing against the red plants. Their thorns wriggled in response, like children swooning over their mother’s attention. “It strengthens the flesh of those who drink it and purifies their souls of treachery. Men and beasts gain beautiful red eyes mirroring their purity.” The metallic stench grew overwhelming. I recognized the grove of trees around us. I had visited this place with Ingrid and Nenetl on the day I met them both. I heard the sound of liquid falling into the water as we approached the imperial ponds. Be strong, Iztac. Do not show fear. “Flowers take the most after us,” Yoloxochitl mused. “They recoil from the sun… and feast at night.” She had hung two people above the fountain. Twisted black trees had sprouted from beneath the water, their branches impaling the arms of two naked men. Needles of wood peeled skin and flesh to feast on the warm blood hidden beneath. Red droplets dripped from ruptured hands and fell into the water below. Crimson lily pads gathered in clusters to share in the feast of blood. Scars of whips and blades covered the naked skin of the two men. Though muscled, blood loss had drained them of color into the pallid hue that preceded incoming death. They felt familiar, but I did not recognize them until I noticed the red hue in their empty eyes. They were my guards. The very same guards that had stood by when Necahual attempted to slap me. “The powerful never reward loyalty, only usefulness,” the wind whispered. “Yet the weak always fail to learn.” “But I…” My stomach soured at the sight of their chests rising and contracting. They were still alive. The plants would not let them die until they had drained every last drop of blood. “I stopped her.” “It matters not to me. That they put you in danger at all is reason enough for punishment.” Yoloxochitl let go of my hand, her voice growing deeper. “The very sight of them fills me with loathing…” I dared peek at her and immediately regretted it. Yoloxochitl’s slim, beautiful body had grown bloated and misshapen. Her robes tore under the strain of expanding flesh, which now threatened to burst open. Her eyes had sunk into her deformed bones. My breath grew short as I caught a glimpse of tentacles wriggling beneath her skin. “Do not look away, Iztac.” Her voice had grown deep as a bottomless void, yet remained so kind, so very gentle, even as she shed her skin like a cloth. The monster burst from Yoloxochitl’s body in the blink of an eye, as great as a tree and as thick as a bramble. A woman as thin as the Nightlord shouldn’t have kept something so big and terrifying hidden within herself, but neither the rules of nature nor those of sanity applied to this abomination. Its shape was vaguely humanoid, with two trunks of flesh roots supporting a steaming chest of pulsing fruits filled with blood and arms covered in fungi blisters. The shadow of an elongated, eyeless red skull was throned atop the monster, its rows of white fangs sharper than any sword. The sides of the tentacled monstrosity swelled with root-like white tentacles grasping for more. Purple flowers grew on the body like a parody of a dress. The reddest of them bloomed on the chest, its flesh petals pulsating like a beating heart. What… What is this thing? My mind came to a screeching halt as it tried to process what my eyes saw. The creature was neither a plant nor a man. It wasn’t even alive. What… “This is simply nature at work,” the abomination said. Her tentacles grabbed one of the men and carried him across the pond, closer to us. “Weeds that threaten my beautiful flower…” The red-eyed guard did not make a sound as his mistress welcomed him with a grasping maw. “Must be nipped in the bud.” Her fangs closed on my guard, biting him in half from the waist up and spraying me with a shower of blood. It felt warm pouring down from above. The gruesome nectar drenched my skin and tainted my robes. I did not step away. I did not walk away. My body was frozen in place by dread, my eyes unable to close, my ears unable to hear anything but the noise of fangs chewing flesh. I could only wait for the sunrise. The feast ended at dawn. Yoloxochitl did not leave a single bone behind. Once she finished, she shapeshifted back into her human shape, her naked skin drenched in blood. She held me into her loving arms and whispered, “I love you,” before slithering away among the receding shadows. The vampiric flowers fled underground in her wake. When servants came for me a few minutes later to carry me away, utterly ignorant of what terrible roots grew beneath their feet, I did not resist. I let them take my clothes and slid my naked body into steaming hot water. “Iztac?” Necahual’s voice whispered out to me through the mists of steam. I hadn’t noticed her among the servants. Her hands were gentle when they cleaned the blood off my face with a towel. “Iztac, what happened?” That was a new thing I heard in her voice—a slight hint of worry. I did not answer it with words. My unblinking eyes stared at the nearest wall, whose polished white marble surface reminded me of bones. How many skeletons are buried under the gardens? How many corpses have I stepped on in my afternoon strolls? If all those plants require blood to survive, how much does it take to water them each day? Two men’s worth of fluid? That made it… what, over seven hundred murders per year? For a garden. Not a Nightkin child or infrastructure with any tangible benefit, however grim. A garden. Seven hundred deaths a year. Only the gods could know how many of them. Fifty years? A century? That would make seventy thousand. Seventy thousand deaths. “Stay away from the gardens at night,” I told Necahual, my voice hollow. “For your sake.” “I… I do not understand.” And she should thank the gods below for it. I did not elaborate. My mind kept wandering back to that horrid thing in the darkness. What kind of warrior could hope to uproot that bloody tree and pierce her rotten heart? None. None at all. The servants clothed me in smooth cotton robes, though I still felt dirty inside. Necahual offered me a cup full of a greenish mixture whose flowery fragrance did not smell of blood. “For the nerves,” she said, somewhat awkwardly. It felt strange for her to act with kindness toward me. “It will soothe your mind.” “Thank you.” I appreciated the gesture, but no drug would help me forget what I had seen. Nor did I want to. I needed to remember that the Nightlords’ cruelty knew no bounds. It would make the tasks ahead easier to justify. “It will help with my morning meditation.” Necahual nodded slightly, a hint of unease on her face. She followed me all the way to the Reliquary’s threshold. Did she hope to protect me? Or was she afraid I would do something foolish in my current state? She did not need to worry. My mind was clear. I stepped alone into the darkness of the shrine and faced the bones of my predecessors. The skulls’ eyes lit up at my approach. They did not offer greetings or words of comfort. They would have been wasted. Instead, they spoke the truth. “You have seen her true self.” “Are they all like this?” I dared to ask. “All four?” “Yes,” my predecessors confirmed. “Each advent of the Scarlet Moon strengthens the Nightlords’ foul magic and separates them further from humanity. Their human skin is but a shell, an echo of what they discarded long ago.” The thing that called itself Yoloxochitl… Something like that didn’t belong in this world or the next. “Now, do you understand why everything is forgiven in the pursuit of our goal?” The Parliament let out a grim rattle. “You are not fighting undead women with more power than any mortal. You are fighting demons hiding beneath a mask of humanity. A veneer that grows thinner with each cycle of death.” I knew. I knew, but I didn’t fully understand. Destroying such abominations would demand absolute commitment. I had wavered on the means to use and their consequences. No longer. A war was a small price to pay to rid mankind of these… these demons. “What weaknesses do they have?” I asked the Parliament. “The same as all children of the night.” The skulls grinned as one. “The sun.” Whose light now flowed through my veins. If I could lull Yoloxochitl into drinking my blood at the correct time, I could weaken her. Probably not to the point of destroying her outright—Mictecacihuatl’s warning came to mind—but enough to give me a chance at slaying her. But my blood was meant for the First Emperor’s altar, to be shed on the night of the Scarlet Moon and no sooner. What would it take to tempt Yoloxochitl into violating that ancient tradition? Much effort, no doubt, and great sacrifice. I will pay any price. My dignity, my body, my soul… I will do whatever it takes. “We are pleased with your progress,” my predecessors congratulated me. “Your Teyolia burns with the embers of the fourth sun. In time, it will shine like the fifth.” “Why did the Nightlords not notice?” I asked. “My heart is bound to their ritual.” “So are we,” the Parliament answered. “Our spirits clouded your heart’s transformation from the Nightlords’ gaze. What happens in the Land of the Dead Suns shall remain hidden from their view, at least for now.” “Thank you, my predecessors.” Still, I noticed the subtle warning. “For now? Not forever?” “Should you continue to harvest the embers, there will come a time when your heart shines too bright for our shadows to cover. The Nightlords will learn the truth then.” There would come a time when my growing power would force a confrontation. “How many suns will it take?” “We cannot say. We have never been in our current position.” The Parliament’s thousand glowing eyes stared at me with sympathy. “Approach each sun as if it were your last.” How many would it take to burn the Nightlords to cinders, I wonder. What happened tonight only strengthened my resolve to delve into Tlalocan as soon as I mastered my spells. “Now tell us of your other exploits,” the Parliament said. “Did you uncover new spells in the city of the dead?” I gave them a report on my progress, how I had unlocked the door to Tlalocan and the Veil spell. The previous emperors greeted my words with enthusiasm. “Your progress pleases us,” they said. “The Veil shall serve you well in the battles to come, whether waged on the battlefield or in a council room. Though venturing into Tlalocan appears premature for now. You best equip yourself in Mictlan.” “I must still practice the Doll and the Veil spells more,” I warned my predecessors. “But I am confident I can trick a few onlookers.” The emperors’ skulls fell silent for a few seconds, meditating on my words. “You plan to use it today. To deceive the empire into starting a war.” They had guessed my plan and its consequences. “Yes.” I’d made my decision the moment I saw Yoloxochitl’s true form. “I… will do what I must do to bring this house of skulls down.” One must give before they receive. This law applied to magic and the gods. Now I realized that it would apply to the world of the living too. I wouldn’t win without making a sacrifice. The Parliament gazed at me with what could pass for grim sympathy. They offered me words of comfort. “All sins are forgiven in the pursuit of a righteous cause, our successor. Always remember these words. Our path is paved with blood and tears, but we must tread it nonetheless.” Thousands would die, but there would come a night where no vampire would water their gardens with fresh blood. At least I prayed for it. “You wish to meet with your fellow Nahualli tonight,” the Parliament murmured. “It is now time to put her latent powers to the test.” “You said you had a way of revealing her Tonalli?” I hoped Nenetl would be a Tlacatecolotl. An ally would greatly help me survive the Underworld. “Indeed.” The Parliament’s eyes glowed with a blue radiance, similar to the pale moonlight. “Through our discussions with the dead that wandered through the Gate of Skulls, we have learned of the existence of a spell called the Gaze, one that relies on a sorcerer’s Teyolia and reveals all that is hidden. Your inner radiance will dispel shadows and force out the truth. Use it on this Nenetl to unveil her animal spirit.” “Can it shatter the Veil spell?” I wondered, squinting. “Huehuecoyotl assured me no spell could.” “The trickster puts too much faith in his power, but he is not entirely wrong,” the Parliament replied. “From what we were taught, the Gaze spell is only as strong as its wielder. A man’s Teyolia is a feeble ember, barely able to show him the way in the dark, and a Nightkin does not even have that. Your heart, however, carries the power of a dead god’s sun. It might help you dissipate weak illusions.” Good. If I could avoid trickery from the Nightlords, I could at least lift some doubts from my heart. “How does one use this spell?” “According to what we learned, you must focus on your heartbeat,” the Parliament taught me. “Look at the light within yourself and guide your Teyolia’s flame to your eyes. Let the sun shine through your gaze.” I sat inside the Reliquary and practiced as I was told. The spell came surprisingly easily to me. The fire slumbering within me desired to be unleashed onto the world. I guided the magical flame coursing through my veins to my eyes, until purple light shone from them. My gaze illuminated the darkness around me, unveiling the obsidian walls of the Reliquary and other hidden details. Most importantly, I noticed four ephemeral, coiling chains of shadows binding my predecessors’ skulls to the ground. The very same bindings that enslaved me to the Nightlords. One day, I will sit in this room and watch them shatter. “This spell is noticeable.” “It should only reveal the truth to you,” the Parliament replied. “Cloak it in the Veil to hide it from others.” I called upon my Tonalli to hide the Gaze spell’s blinding light behind an illusion of normalcy. While I managed to shroud my inner light, my eyes quickly started to hurt. They felt as if they were drying, and I had little choice but to stop both spells. Fools looking at the sun too long go blind. The sunlight within me will do the same if I keep the Gaze spell up too long. In this world full of liars, I would have to use the truth sparingly. “Hours pass and your council meeting approaches,” the Parliament warned me. “We know another Ihiyotl spell to teach you, but it shall wait until our next meeting. We wish you good luck until we meet again.” I nodded sharply as I rose to my feet. “When I come back, the empire will be at war.” The skulls ominously grinned at me. “Good.” Somehow, their congratulations did not bring me any joy. I walked out of the Reliquary to find two new guards waiting outside. They appeared younger than Yoloxochitl’s victims, though no less foolish. “I will visit one of my consorts tonight,” I said. “My dear Nenetl loves games and foreign objects. Gather my collection in her apartment.” “As you wish, Emperor,” answered one of them with a deep bow. “Is there any object you wish to showcase in particular?” “We are to play Sapa board games, so bring what we have on their culture.” Especially that magical tablet. The Gaze will reveal to me its secrets, and the Veil shall add weight to my lies. The Parliament of Skulls warned me that the Nightlords would not attack the Sapa unless forced to. With the Veil spell, I could gain the perfect pretext. One not even my cruel captors could ignore. By sunset, I would have my war. part0019. 14SHADOW ON THE WALL Ibegan the bloodiest day of my tenure yet by practicing the Augury spell on the roof of the palace. It was quite easy to disguise as morning prayer, though I required the use of the Veil spell to disguise the flames rising from my blood when I offered it to the wind. Lady Sigrun gave me information to spare—morsels on which guard fucked which and what servant stole what from the kitchen. These tales wouldn’t help me much in my quest, but the Yaotzin accepted them as payment nonetheless. “Hide these codices, Centehua,” the wind whispered in an old man’s voice. “Hide them from the priests, where they will never be found. Therein lies the true history.” “I shall, Father,” a woman’s echo answered, far, far away. “I shall bury them beneath the bricks of the western temple, right under their own feet. Their lies will cover the truth.” As a test of my mysterious “sources,” Lady Sigrun had asked that I find what happened to stolen codices written by a certain scribe called Mazatl. The Yaotzin’s whispers let me piece out the truth. Mazatl, who worked on behalf of priests to write—or rather, rewrite—history codices according to imperial orthodoxy, kept private books detailing imperial history, which the empire sought to suppress. He gave them away to his daughter, Centehua, who then proceeded to hide them right under the priests’ noses. I had no idea what Lady Sigrun sought to use such information for. Did she intend to recover the books for herself? Use them as leverage? Or to blackmail Mazatl and his family? “Your sacrifice has earned you one more question,” the wind whispered into my ear. “Speak wisely.” I was tempted to ask for Lady Sigrun’s motives for seeking the codices, if only to figure out her plans, but I quickly realized I needed something stronger. While I sought to make her an ally, she remained motivated by self-interest. I needed insurance. “What secret would give me power over Lady Sigrun?” I muttered under my breath. “What information would prevent any betrayal?” The morning breeze blew on my face. “Fjor never joined the army.” Fjor? I remembered the name as Lady Sigrun’s son, who had left her household upon reaching adulthood. “Has she lied to me about him?” I asked, utterly puzzled. “Why? Where did her son go?” “The ugliest truth fetches a high price,” the wind answered. Curses. Pay with morsels, buy scraps. Much like any cunning merchant, the Yaotzin only tempted me to better shake me down later. Whatever the case, if discovering the true fate of Sigrun’s son would ensure her loyalty to me, then it warranted an investigation. I would have to be careful, though. If she learned of my investigation, she might very well react with a preemptive strike. She did lie to my face after all. I was lost within my thoughts as I was finishing my “morning prayers.” I cannot trust anyone within these walls. Not without leverage. As promised, I invited Lady Sigrun to breakfast and gave her a queen’s place at my table—she took the spot on my left and Ingrid the one on my right. The other consorts had to face me on the other side of the table, a subtle message that I was certain the servants noticed. By evening, the entire palace would know that Lady Sigrun and her daughter were now in the emperor’s good graces. My other consorts’ reactions told me much about their political skills. Chikal’s eyes darted from Sigrun to me, so she clearly understood we had formed an alliance of some sort. Nenetl appeared utterly oblivious to the situation and greeted the older concubine with gentle courtesy. As for Eztli, she simply smirked in amusement. “I did not know you appreciated mature women, Iztac. We should rob a retirement home for some variety.” “Our Lord Emperor prefers wisdom and sound advice over the young’s foolishness,” Lady Sigrun replied, her courtesy hiding the subtle insult. Eztli chuckled lightly, although her crimson eyes did not smile when her lips did. “He has a woman for the mind and another for the heart.” “I wonder who will get the liver,” Ingrid quipped. Nenetl forced herself to smile, but even she had sensed the tension in the room. I didn’t pay much attention; someone’s absence at the table bothered me. “Where is Tlacaelel?” I asked one of the servants, one of the four half-naked women working on delivering us food and drinks. Necahual was among them, pouring a red drink into her daughter’s cup. “Is he coming late today?” Not that I wanted to see him, but I worried his absence might spell trouble down the line. “I am afraid not, Your Divine Majesty,” the servant said. Oh, that was a new title. “Poor Tlacaelel perished this morning.” “Too ba—” I didn’t finish my sentence, as my mouth caught on to what my ears had heard. My head snapped in my servant’s direction. “What?” “Loyal Tlacaelel fell from the stairs on his way to this very meeting and broke his neck,” the servant said with a sad sigh. Necahual, who was nearby, froze upon hearing these words. “By the time the healers arrived, he was already dead.” “He must have been too hasty to serve his emperor,” Lady Sigrun managed to say with a sorry expression. “Why is it always the good ones who die so early?” I stared at her, utterly astonished by that woman’s sheer nerve. The slight inflection of her brows, the way she blinked as if struggling to hold back tears, the subtle way her cheeks and lips strained to show just enough emotion to imply real sadness but not enough to give herself away… If I didn’t know any better, Lady Sigrun might have persuaded me that she sincerely regretted Tlacaelel’s passing. If I ever succeed in overthrowing the Nightlords, she should become an actress next. She has an incredible talent for it. So fast? I tried to recover from the shock. I knew I had ordered Tlacaelel killed, but I expected Lady Sigrun to poison him over the week, not murder him within a day’s time. This woman does not waste time. Wait, what about the poison? If Tlacaelel died from a broken neck, what happened to Necahual’s drug? “That makes me think; I did leave your room in haste yesterday,” I said, staring at Lady Sigrun with a hand around my chocolate cup. “I hope I did not forget anything.” “Oh, Lord Emperor, you need not worry,” Lady Sigrun replied, holding my gaze and giving nothing away. “I cleaned up everything myself.” That cunning weasel! She kept the poison as insurance so I wouldn’t betray her! Still, I couldn’t help but admire Lady Sigrun’s efficiency. I gave an order to have someone murdered, and not only was that target dead by sunrise, but she managed to obtain blackmail material to protect herself if I ever tried to throw her under a carriage. If I could earn her trust and loyalty, she would make for a powerful ally. It only solidified my choice to investigate her son. If she wasn’t afraid to keep dirt on me, I should return the favor. “That’s awful,” Nenetl whispered. Unlike Sigrun, she appeared genuinely shocked. “Did… Did he suffer?” The servant winced. “From what I was told, my lady… he was in agony for a full minute.” Good. My mouth hurt from the sheer effort it took me to suppress a smile. I must learn how to hide my glee. It might give me away one day. “Good,” Eztli said, not bothering with subtlety. As for Necahual, she didn’t hide her joy at all. Her cruel smile beamed with happiness and the satisfaction of an appeased grudge. “I would like to visit his corpse,” I said. Oh my, how did I struggle to hide my joy! After my terrifying encounter with Yoloxochitl, this news filled me with immense happiness. “To pay my last respects.” “Of course, oh Divine Godspeaker,” the servant answered with a bow. “We shall have the body prepared in time for your visit.” “I shall do it right after breakfast,” I decided. Watching Tlacaelel’s remains would energize me for the day. “The Nightlords will surely select a new advisor by tomorrow,” Chikal noted. If she had guessed what happened, she didn’t show any hint of it. “Until then, it is up to us to guide our Lord Emperor.” “On that front, have you completed plans for our summer campaigns?” I asked Chikal. “I wish to decide which enemy we shall target with haste.” “Of course, Lord Emperor.” Chikal clapped her hands, and servants fetched us maps and documents. “I have also taken the initiative of gathering reports on your army’s current state.” “Excellent,” I replied. The more I knew of Yohuachanca’s armies, the better I could sabotage them. We spent breakfast listening to Chikal’s reports. The council session proved much more bearable without Tlacaelel’s false flatteries and attempts to deter me from attacking the Sapa Empire. As befitting of her experience as a military leader, Chikal’s explanations were concise, straight to the point, and no less enlightening. As befitting an empire that had been at war since its foundation, Yohuachanca’s army was as refined as its tribute system. The core unit of my troops was an eight-thousand-man-strong platoon called the xiquipilli, themselves divided between groups of four hundred and warbands of twenty soldiers. Each of them had at least one assigned porter to carry equipment and who could be deployed as fresh troops. A tenth of those soldiers belonged to elite military orders such as the Nightflowers, who escorted the emperor and his generals into battle; holy fraternities dedicated to individual Nightlords, such as the Jaguar Warriors and Eagle Knights; and the infamous Shorn Ones, the most revered warriors in Yohuachanca’s society, who each had captured at least ten sacrifices and accomplished six heroic deeds. The empire’s cavalry, mostly trihorn riders and armored longnecks, made up one-twentieth of the imperial troops. Yohuachanca’s ever-growing population and the fact that each man received military training allowed the empire to field vast armies. Chilam and Balam were crushed by a human tide of four hundred thousand soldiers, and a previous emperor who ruled twenty years before me set the south on fire at the helm of seven hundred thousand men. And that was just the land army. The empire recently started developing a navy, both to enslave the people of the Boiling Sea in the east and launch raids in the west. Add in the support staff, and Yohuachanca’s military probably exceeded a million members. I couldn’t wrap my head around that mind-blowing number. “In the last century, the empire has struggled less with raising armies and more with feeding them,” Chikal explained. “Since porters have their limits, tributaries are now required to manage food stores to supply troops deployed to the frontier.” Once again, the tributary system proved itself as the empire’s lifeblood. I needed to dry it out if I wanted to break Yohuachanca’s backbone. When Ingrid leaned against me halfway through the lecture, I let her do so and put a hand around her waist. I didn’t miss the way she glanced at the guards and servants to check if they saw everything. I admit it bothered me. I felt like a girl’s doll being prettied up to impress strangers. It was a small price to pay to secure her family’s assistance in my fights to come, but a part of me still found it loathsome. It took me a minute to figure out why. They’re not even trying to fight back. My eyes wandered from Ingrid to her mother. The mother will stay a slave until she dies, the eldest daughter will be sacrificed on the altar, and the youngest will probably follow in a decade or so. Yet they would rather play the Nightlords’ game than try to flip the table. For all their talents, Lady Sigrun and Ingrid had surrendered. They could have tried to evacuate Ingrid, to escape the palace with her sister Astrid, and rebuild their lives somewhere else. Anything would have been better than toiling in this prison. My face must have given something away, for Ingrid stared at me with a strange look. Though it didn’t last more than a second, I could have sworn I detected a hint of shame and anger in her gaze. She quickly corrected her expression when her mother sent her a sideways glance. Interesting. Could Ingrid resent her mother’s plan for her? The Yaotzin did warn me that she would bite rather than starve. If she had truly inherited Lady Sigrun’s ambition, then she probably aspired to more than being a sacrifice on the altar. “Attacking the Three-Rivers Federation would be a straightforward march north,” Chikal explained. “Our main issue will be overextension and maintaining supply lines since the north’s lands are poor. A large army won’t be able to live off the land, especially if the northerners scorch the earth on our way⁠—” My eyes wandered to the rest of the audience. Lady Sigrun and Nenetl both listened—the former with keen focus and the latter with apprehension. My fellow Nahualli had been trained to administer the empire, not lead it in a war, and the subject clearly made her uncomfortable. As for Eztli, she didn’t even bother to seem interested in the report. Instead, she played with cacao beans, setting them up in patterns on her plate. It is time. With everyone either listening to Chikal’s lecture or distracted, I could use both the Gaze and Veil spells at once without too many skeptics focusing on my illusion. Let us see what secrets you all hide from me. Purple sunlight poured out of my eyes, wreathed under a cloak of illusion. I immediately sensed the weight of multiple people’s attention falling on my Veil spell. The gaze of servants; the sideways glances Lady Sigrun, Ingrid, and Eztli often sent me; and an invisible presence coming from the wall to my left. A spy observed me from behind a secret passage. Neat. I hadn’t realized that since the Veil struggled against the weight of others’ observation, I could use it to detect hidden spies. Perhaps I should try to keep the spell up constantly to protect myself. In any case, none of my observers were doubtful enough to disbelieve my illusion. I managed to hide my Gaze spell and gather precious information. First of all, I immediately noticed a phantom rope coiled around Ingrid’s chest, one bearing the mark of a white snake. I recognized it as an exact copy of one of the four chains holding my Teyolia bound to the Nightlords. Similar enchantments protruded from all other consorts, the ropes losing themselves into the ground. I assumed these leashes connected all the way back to their masters. Now, let us see what spirit you hide, Nenetl. I focused my Gaze spell on my shyest consort and stared into the depths of her soul. I immediately noticed a great beast’s shadow looming protectively over her. Whereas my Tonalli was clad in black feathers, Nenetl’s was covered in white fur. The beast reminded me of a dog, but mightier and more majestic. Its silver fangs shone like ivory daggers while its blue eyes were as pale as mine. It took me a while to recognize the creature, but I remembered seeing one in my menagerie. A wolf. Nenetl’s Tonalli was the wolf. Ugh, disappointing. I had hoped she would be a fellow Tlacatecolotl who could follow me into the Underworld. Still, I wondered what kind of magic a lupine Tonalli might possess and why someone as shy as her possessed such a fearsome totem. Perhaps it belied inner strength of some kind? Moreover, the wolf-spirit appeared to detect me. It glared back at me in defiance, baring its fangs, all but daring me to make a move on its mortal host and find out what would happen. You have quite the fearsome totem watching over you, Nenetl. A pity it cannot protect you from the true enemy. At least for now. The Parliament informed me they had a way of awakening Nenetl’s Tonalli spirit. A wolf might not follow me into the sleeping world, but it might make a powerful ally in the waking one. Having received the answer I sought, my eyes wandered to the other people in the room. To my surprise, I noticed strange symbols on Lady Sigrun’s cheeks. They reminded me of the foreign runes I had seen on her private altar, except these were drawn into the woman’s very flesh. I sensed faint magic radiating from them, though nothing I could identify. Could she be using the Veil spell? I wondered, taken aback. My Gaze spell didn’t detect the presence of any Tonalli. What kind of foreign sorcery was this? Is she a witch in disguise, on top of all the other things? Lady Sigrun noticed the stares I sent her way. An amused smile stretched at the end of her lips, and I looked away rather than bring more suspicions upon myself. I truly needed to investigate this woman further. Finally… I dared to look at Eztli. I had dreaded the moment the second the Parliament taught me the Gaze spell. After witnessing Yoloxochitl’s true form, I dreaded seeing Eztli’s human shape hide a rotting terror underneath. What I saw… What I saw was both cause for concern and relief. On one hand, my Gaze spell saw Eztli as I hoped to—my oldest friend, with paler skin, red eyes, and sharper teeth. She wore no dress of flowers, nor did tentacles grow out of her flesh. I noticed hints of jet-black bat wings folded behind her shoulders and nails sharper than claws, but otherwise, Eztli appeared… not fully human anymore, but close. On the other hand, there was a gaping, bleeding hole where her heart should have been. A bottomless pit of darkness from which sprang a rope marked with Yoloxochitl’s symbol. No Teyolia burned within her. Darkness had taken over where there once used to be light, leaving only a hungry void behind. And when her eyes turned in my direction, Eztli turned to meet them. I could tell she knew. She knew I was using some kind of spell to observe her true self. She squinted a bit, the way a normal person would when facing the sun. She found it uncomfortable, albeit not deadly. I should have guessed she would sense the Gaze spell. The spell focused a dead sun’s light through my eyes. Of course, a child of the night would find it uncomfortable, even if I hid it under a visual illusion. If I use it in the Nightlords’ presence, they will immediately notice it too. The Gaze spell bothered Eztli slightly… and yet she did not turn away. She returned my stare with a blank expression, as if torn between her vampiric survival instinct and her inner desire to see the sun. In the end, I canceled the Gaze spell, both to avoid hurting her and because my eyes started to dry up. For a brief second, Eztli wore that same dreadful look as when I woke up to see her staring at the sun through a window. An expression of utter despair, of bitter realization that she would forever recoil from the light she once basked in. It only lasted an instant before she regained her previous joviality. Do you want to see the sun so much that you’d be willing to let it burn you, Eztli? From the way she stared at me, yes, she did. I’m sorry, but I can’t grant your wish. I did wonder what effect the Gaze would have on vampires once I had consumed enough divine embers. I was delighted at the idea of burning the Nightlords to death with a mere glare. With her regained composure, Eztli smiled mischievously at me after I dropped my Gaze spell. I immediately recognized her expression. Eztli always used it when she had done something bad and yet managed to get away with it. What are you trying to tell me? My eyes wandered to her plate. She had assembled the beans into various shapes, sets of squares and rectangles crossed by lines. Most would have seen nothing more than a pointless puzzle, but I had memorized enough of the palace’s layout to recognize a shabby map of the current floor. The rectangles and cubes made up the rooms, but I didn’t recognize the lines. If they represented passageways, then they didn’t fit the floor’s architect⁠— Oh. The secret passages. My eyes met Eztli, and she began to subtly alter her beans’ position. I memorized their positions and sent glances her way while half-listening to Chikal’s perfect plan of attack to assault the Three-Rivers Federation. Knowledge of the secret passages would serve me well for assassinations. With them, I could deploy my Tonalli through them thanks to Spiritual Manifestation and ambush targets with no one the wiser. “This is nothing I haven’t heard before,” I informed Chikal after Eztli swept away her cacao beans with a wave of her hand. From what she told me, the only real difficulty would be ensuring our army’s battle lines didn’t outpace our supply lines. “Will it truly be so easy?” “I would never underestimate any foe,” Chikal said with a shrug. “But all things considered, the odds are overwhelmingly in our favor. You will gather your ten thousand tributes in a heartbeat, Lord Emperor.” “We don’t have to look that far for fresh blood, Iztac,” Eztli said while playing with the cacao. I caught Lady Sigrun glimpsing at her plate for a brief instant, her eyes squinting. “Let us cull Acampa for a start.” “Acampa?” Nenetl gulped. “But… isn’t that your hometown?” Eztli smiled cruelly, her fangs sharp and deadly. Her smile reminded me of Yoloxochitl’s, much to my dread. “And none of us would miss it.” Necahual, who waited in a corner to refill our drinks, remained silent as a stone. As for Nenetl, she started chewing her lip, holding back a complaint. “I have to admit I wouldn’t miss Acampa either,” I said. Too many bad memories. “But where’s the glory in sacrificing our own people?” “Our Lord is wise and kind,” Ingrid said with a smile. “The people will not love a ruler who shies away from battle.” Perhaps they should, considering the calamity I was about to unleash upon them. Though I had finally come around to using all means available to topple the Nightlords, I understood all too well the consequences of my actions. Innocents would suffer for the greater good. “Still, waging war on the north against poor savages with even poorer lands to conquer does not appeal to me,” I said. “What of the Sapa Empire?” Chikal sighed as she unfolded another map. “I will not lie, Lord Emperor, the Sapa Empire will prove far more difficult to subsume. Even if we were to throw all of our forces at the task, I doubt we will see its fall in your lifetime.” “But we can at least lay the foundations,” I said mirthfully. “As I said yesterday, I would rather ensure history remembers my name. Besides, our warriors deserve better than cold lands when worthy opponents and richer targets await in the south.” Lady Sigrun, who had remained mostly silent so far, decided to speak up. “Your bravery does you credit, Emperor Iztac, and your instincts are ever sharp. I believe you will find the Sapa Empire far more fragile than Lady Chikal expects.” Chikal frowned at her. “How so?” It was Ingrid who answered in her mother’s place. “According to our diplomats, there is a conflict brewing in the Sapa’s royal house,” she said. “The current emperor has recently died without naming a successor, and though his eldest son has been hastily named heir, his brothers are fuming. Since powerful noble families and magicians support each of them, a civil war might loom on the horizon.” “Moreover, much like Yohuachanca, the Sapa Empire has grown by assimilating rival tribes,” Lady Sigrun added. “Fortunately for us, their false gods and emperor do not earn the same love ours do from the population. Should these provinces be offered assistance and better terms, they might turn their back on their conquerors.” And one of her discreet allies would profit from it, I presumed. I wondered who had bribed Lady Sigrun to defend their interests in my halls. The Sapa Emperor’s brothers, who hoped to unseat him? Or rebellious tributaries eager to throw off their conqueror’s yoke by setting them against a rival nation? Whatever the case, their support would serve me well. The Sapa disappointed me, though. I knew all empires were built on conquest, but I had hoped they would treat their tributaries well enough to make them want to stay under their banner. Perhaps these people were too far away from Yohuachanca to realize where the true evil resided. I would have to help them learn that. “This is good news,” Chikal conceded. “However, nothing unites a feuding tribe like an external threat.” I prayed the Sapa people would. Otherwise, they would not survive the incoming conflict. Be better than us. I beg of you. Be better. “Not if we support a faction’s interests against concessions,” Ingrid replied calmly. I was all but certain she and her mother had rehearsed this very conversation. “If we offered our help to one of them, we could negotiate new territories.” Chikal considered the offer for a short while. I didn’t need magic to read her mind. This was more or less the same situation her city went through when Yohuachanca closed in on its doors. “That could work,” the former queen said. “My original plan did not take this information into account, but I see no reason why we could not play with multiple strategies.” “What would you suggest?” I asked her, trying to gather as much information as possible before making a decision. “The sea is the Sapa Empire’s soft underbelly.” Chikal traced a line alongside the map’s western edge and the southern continent’s shores. “They are mountainous people, used to living in valleys and peaks rather than the sea. Not only do they lack a navy, but their ports are more or less undefended. My plan was to send troops from our land frontiers to distract them, then strike at the coast to establish a permanent foothold.” I had to admit—the idea sounded good on paper. If we could seize the Sapa Empire’s western edges, we would be able to threaten them from multiple directions. They would have to react. Would Yohuachanca scare these princelings enough to band against us? I have actually no intention of sowing division between them, but even a queen like Chikal bent under the pressure. They’re siblings. Family should be more important than ambition. Or at least I hoped so. I never had a brother or sister, so I couldn’t tell. “This strategy would allow us to secure the blood tributes, gather wealth, and set up bases for future raids,” Chikal concluded, albeit with a caveat. “However, I draw a blank at how we could conquer the Sapa Empire’s larger inland cities. Not only are they well-defended and self-sufficient, but the mountainous terrain heavily favors them. It will take years for sieges to yield any result.” “Are you not forgetting something, Chikal?” Eztli mused as she finished her bloody cup. “We do have a way of bypassing those silly rocks.” Chikal squinted at her fellow consort, her expression blank. “Last time I checked, soldiers do not fly.” “Humans do not, no.” Eztli’s smile turned sinister. “But gods live in the heavens, do they not?” My Eztli, always so mischievous. She thought along the same lines as me. I still remembered the way a Nightkin swooped down from the sky to carry me screaming atop the Blood Pyramid. That was partly why I was so intent on fighting the Sapa Empire. A land of mountains all but required aerial troops for a successful conquest. Nightkin would make the best shock troops on the war’s frontline, right in the line of fire of the Sapa Empire’s archers. Whereas fighting the Three-Rivers Federation would give the vampires an excuse to stay hidden. After all, their mortal army wouldn’t need them to conquer the north. Chikal scowled, her gaze set upon me. “Would they lend us their strength?” She didn’t wish to ask the real question—would the Nightlords support me in this ambitious scheme? I ruled as an emperor among men, but the Nightkin owed allegiance to their four queens. That was why Chikal did not include them in the army’s composition, although they participated in Yohuachanca’s campaigns—because they did not answer to me. Here lies my problem. I had to convince the Nightlords to authorize an invasion of the only nation that could possibly fight back against them, which would require them to send their brood to slaughter. As the Parliament warned me, they would deny me unless I forced their hand. And I had a plan to do just that. “I will petition the goddesses for their favor in this endeavor,” I said diplomatically. “My instincts tell me the stars align in our favor.” A part of me still felt a little remorse at the idea of starting a war against a foreign nation. Whenever guilt threatened to come rising to the surface, I pictured Yoloxochitl tending to her garden of flesh in her true, terrifying shape. No matter how many people I slew, it would still be a drop in the ocean of blood her kind left in her wake. I would not hesitate any longer. “My Lord is wise to believe so,” Ingrid said with a satisfied smile, while Lady Sigrun settled on a firm nod. “The Sapa Empire is showing weakness. Only a true emperor like Your Majesty may exploit it successfully.” She says out loud what her mother whispers into her ear. I supposed a concubine couldn’t give advice unless invited to do so. That privilege went to the emperor’s consorts. I’m starting to pick up on these things. In the end, it was all a game of make-believe. “I will require your assistance in this, Ingrid,” I said, pulling her closer. All for show. “As my consort in charge of diplomacy, I must rely on you to find the cracks in our enemies’ armor.” “Of course, my Lord.” Ingrid smiled and dared to kiss me lightly on the lips in return. The gesture was quick, calculated, all for the gallery. But if she and her mother helped me get my war, I was more than willing to return it. “You can trust me.” My only worry was Eztli’s reaction. To my surprise, she didn’t appear to care at all. While Nenetl blushed in embarrassment as usual and Chikal observed the scene with a cynical look, my oldest companion couldn’t seem to care less. Even Necahual appeared more bothered than her daughter, though I wondered why. I would have the occasion to discuss it with her in private. With breakfast over, the next item on my imperial agenda was public audiences. Yohuachanca’s emperor acted as the final judge and jury on important legal cases, received petitions, and spoke on the Nightlords’ behalf when it came to matters of religion. As Yoloxochitl’s pick, Eztli would assist me in these tasks. A task she seemed to relish. “Ready to quarter fools and cut off empty heads, Iztac?” she asked me with amusement. “I daresay we can start reaping the tribute today.” Eztli didn’t sound serious, but I couldn’t really tell what she thought anymore. I hoped she was only playing a part like I did. Desperately so. “Later,” I replied. “First, I wish to pay my respects to Tlacaelel.” Perhaps I should piss on his corpse? He had always loved sucking up to those stronger than him. No, that would be too crass and paint a target on my back. I could settle on silently relishing his death without giving anything away. Considering the ordeals ahead, I better practice hiding my emotions in public. “Oh, me too.” Eztli chuckled and turned to face her mother, who was still waiting for orders in a corner. “You won’t mind taking her with us?” Her. I noticed the phrasing. Not “Mother.” So did Necahual. Her crestfallen expression spoke volumes about her anguish. In this case, we both knew Eztli was faking it. She was playing the role of Yoloxochitl’s perfect daughter, who had mostly discarded her mortal mother for an immortal one. Necahual had to understand that it was for her own protection, since that particular Nightlord was a vicious, jealous creature. But it still wounded her heart. Lady Sigrun, who had observed the situation, immediately exploited it. “Lady Necahual, is it?” she asked her fellow concubine with a pleasant smile. “Would you kindly join me for the midday meal? After completing your morning tasks, of course.” Necahual frowned in surprise. “A meal?” “As fellow concubines and mothers of consorts, are we not in-laws?” Sigrun gently held Necahual’s hands into her own. “I understand how lonely life in this palace can feel. I felt the same when I first arrived. It took me time to find friends.” It was a blatant attempt at sizing up Necahual—either as a threat or a potential ally. To her credit, my mother-in-law realized it as well. A brief scowl of anger flashed on her face before being swiftly replaced with a mask of courtesy. “I would appreciate it,” Necahual said without truly meaning it. “Excellent.” Lady Sigrun then offered me a bow. “Will you join us, Emperor Iztac?” “But of course,” I replied with courtesy. “I will have to decline any offer of dinner, however. I have already promised my dear Nenetl.” Nenetl looked down. “Sorry.” “Do not be, Lady Nenetl,” Lady Sigrun replied kindly, though I couldn’t tell if she was sincere. “I prefer quality to quantity when it comes to enjoying one’s time.” “I do find your conversation pleasant,” I said. And it would be all the more interesting once we exchanged information. “Until then, enjoy your morning.” So ended the council session. My schedule for the day was clear—after completing the justice audiences and reviewing public projects—namely, Yoloxochitl’s statue—in the morning and a midday meal, I would spend the evening “alone” with Nenetl. I expected spies to observe us from the secret passages. In fact, I was counting on them. I required witnesses. Influencing multiple people with the Veil spell might prove difficult, but the spectacle I had in mind shouldn’t feel too far-fetched. Everyone already expected the Sapa Empire’s gifts to be poisoned. I left the council room with Eztli, her mother, and a score of guards in tow. The dead’s remains were stored in the dungeons in the palace’s basement. Our group descended through spiraling stairs into underground chambers, a bit too close to the Abode of Darkness for my comfort. I half-expected Yoloxochitl to jump out of the shadows to greet me. “How was little Goldenhair in bed?” Eztli asked without warning. She laughed out loud when she saw me blush. “Come on, Iztac, don’t be shy. I want to hear it.” She was teasing me, but her nonchalance still bothered me. I couldn’t explain why. I should feel relieved. I didn’t need jealousy or in-fighting among people I hoped to make my allies. “Technically talented, but passionless,” I confessed. “We’re just using each other.” Eztli’s small smile betrayed her satisfaction. “As I thought.” I squinted at her, holding back a scoff of amusement. “It’s not a competition.” “Why would it be?” Eztli leaned in closer to me and whispered into my ear, too low for others to listen. “They’re all tools, are they not?” It might have been true, in a way—my relationship with Ingrid was an alliance of convenience forced onto us by the Nightlords—but the cold, ruthless tone Eztli used was so unlike her that it sent shivers down my spine. My eyes wandered to her chest, at the spot where I saw a black void not so long ago. Eztli’s hand brushed against my stomach and moved down, very close to… intimate parts. “I already share this with chamber pots, so why not with dolls? Make use of it as you wish. That’s what the old bats want from you—a shiny prince more preoccupied with bedding pretty girls and doing their bidding than fighting back.” My jaw tightened. “I don’t want to act that way.” “But you will have to if you want to win the game. Yoloxochitl is already enamored with you, but she is gullible. It will take more work to convince the others that you are no threat at all.” Eztli’s cold fingers moved up my chest, all the way to my heart. “This is the only part of you I won’t share.” A pity, four vampires had already bound it to their altar. Still, the passion in her voice warmed my heart, for she sounded sincere. “Do you mean it?” “Yes, of course.” Her eyes wandered to Necahual, who followed us like our shadow. “We do what we must to survive, and then we will start over.” Start over. I had no idea what I would do if we ever succeeded in toppling the Nightlords. That mountain was so high that I couldn’t see anything beyond it. If I find a cure in the Underworld… perhaps I could return Eztli’s heart to her. That was my sincerest wish, but so much remained to be done. “Ingrid had a brother called Fjor,” I whispered into Eztli’s ear. “I would like to know what happened to him. The priests must keep records of what happens to the emperor’s children.” “Of course they do. They keep records of everybody’s lineage.” Eztli nodded sharply. “I will share what I find.” “Thank you. Since Sigrun has spies everywhere in this palace, I can trust no one else.” “You can trust Mother too.” Eztli looked over her shoulder. “She is better disposed toward you than before. I can tell.” “I guess we formed a truce.” The poison plan was a bust, but as the Parliament said, I had best practice assassination on small fry before targeting truly dangerous enemies. We finally made our way to our destination—an underground crypt with a vaulted obsidian ceiling and alcoves holding corpses. Since the palace employed thousands of servants, some with dangerous jobs—feeding beasts at the menagerie often resulted in mauling or worse—the red-eyed priests stored their remains in this place until they could be given a proper burial. Tlacaelel had been set on a bed of stone for our eyes only. The priests had done their best to make him presentable, but the corpse was too fresh to hide most wounds. His brown skin had turned pallid, and his neck was puffy from damage. His spine was bent in a way that should be anatomically impossible, and from the way his skull was caved inward, he must have hit a stonestep in his fall. His eyes were closed, though his expression was far from peaceful. The hypocritical smile he had shown me so many times and the cruel grin he proudly wore when Guatemoc perished were nowhere to be seen. I had to admit it. Seeing Tlacaelel’s corpse filled me with immense satisfaction. I stared at his face, poking it to confirm he was indeed dead. To my delight, he was indeed stiff and cold. He’s dead. I struggled with all my heart not to smirk. Eztli already did it for the two of us. As for Necahual, she spat at his remains. A few guards appeared outraged at the gesture, but I stopped them with a raised hand. I feel at peace. I had ordered an enemy to be murdered and it happened so swiftly… Was that the essence of power? To decide who lived and who died? No wonder it went to the heads of so many people. It felt delightful. My only regret was not killing Tlacaelel myself. I guessed I would catch up to him in the Underworld. He would find no rest in this world or the next. I knew his death wouldn’t change much. The Nightlords would swiftly replace him with someone else. Still, it gave me hope for the future. When it came to cleaning out the trash, no piece of crap was too small to dispose of. Tlacaelel was the least and first of my enemies to die, but he would not be the last. part0020. 15THE LAWS OF THE REALM In many ways, Yohuachanca’s emperor was first and foremost a prophet. As the Godspeaker, my voice carried the weight of the Nightlords’ authority. Though the red-eyed priests held me accountable to their mistresses, I acted as the final court of the realm on judicial and religious matters. I was a living effigy, a totem whose divinely-inspired judgment could tell right from wrong. Eztli lurked in the shadow of my obsidian throne, the night to my daylight. My agenda for today’s grievance hearing, the first of my reign, was quite heavy. Items on the agenda included the organization of the year’s religious festivals, justice cases my predecessor failed to settle before his death, and deciding the fate of various territories. I decided to address matters from the most to the least urgent. That way, I hoped to finish in a good mood in time for my meal. “Oh great Godspeaker, we bow before your divine majesty!” A group of red-eyed priests knelt at my throne’s feet, the sound of their hands touching the ground echoing in my hall. “We beg you to enlighten the people of the Boiling Sea and set them on the path to salvation!” I sat in silence, my face a mask of stone, as the priests explained to me how my glorious predecessors brought the eastern islands to their knees. I remembered quite well the presence of their ambassadors on the day after my coronation. They had given me gifts to show their fealty. The fact that those same representatives weren’t present today spoke volumes about how much power they held. Words from my religious studies came to mind—woe to the conquered. “The people of the Boiling Sea worship spirits and false deities, oh Godspeaker,” a priest said. “Vile sea monsters and broken idols. Though the children of the night led the conquest, many of the old temples still stand today, and shamans still preside over sinful ceremonies. We beseech you to decide their fate.” My first instinct was to leave them be, if only to spite the priests. Still, I decided to ask for more details first. “How did my predecessor begin with them?” “Divine Nochtli, blessed his soul may be, proved too merciful,” the chief priest said. “He allowed them to keep their faith so long as they paid tribute and obedience to the goddesses. It was his hope that the people would grow to love the empire if the transition of power proved smooth.” Considering Nochtli had been planning a coup against the Nightlords, I suspected he wished for the islanders to join his aborted revolt. Clearly, he had miscalculated. “Did the people of the islands love Nochtli?” I asked. “Of course. When he gave his life to the goddesses, they sacrificed slaves in his name so that they might guide him in the afterlife.” A gift that proved futile once his soul was entombed in a pillar of skulls. Moreover, the islanders did not rise in revolt for him when he was brought drugged to the altar. Their recent conquest had bled the fight out of them. “The love of the masses is cheap and easy to earn,” Eztli mused. “You get what you pay for, Iztac.” The islanders might be thankful for small kindnesses, but we will always remain a foreign conqueror to them. I leaned in closer to Eztli, whispering, “How do you suggest we proceed?” “I see three options,” she whispered back while playing with her nails. “You can keep things as they are. The islanders will send you seashell baskets, our priests will grumble, and nothing will change. Otherwise, the priesthood can slowly begin to assimilate the local culture.” That was the standard procedure in Yohuachanca. Islander priests would be bound to the Nightlords and gain red-eyes. Their words and books would be slowly rewritten to merge their gods with their new vampiric mistresses in their pantheon, until one day the people of the Boiling Sea would forget all of their traditions. The process might take decades, but in the end Yohuachanca would swallow them whole. Obviously, that option did not appeal to me. “What’s the third choice?” “Why, but forced conversion, of course!” Eztli’s smile unveiled her fangs. “We scour their temples of riches, burn them to the ground, then build new ones over the ruins! Local shamans must either convert or die!” A chill traveled down my spine. “That will infuriate the islanders.” “Of course.” Eztli shrugged, her smirk unwavering. “You will need more sacrifices for summer, do you not? A paltry sacrifice, I must say.” Moments like this reminded me that while part of Eztli remained within her new vampire self, bloodlust and cruelty had filled the hole Yoloxochitl left in her heart. Still, her solution made me wonder. The islanders had witnessed Nochtli’s death without intervention because they feared the Nightlords more than they liked him. What inspired me to take arms against them? Hate. Once hate grew stronger than fear, it inspired a mad form of bravery in the hearts of men. Enough to defy four goddesses in my case. The courage of the desperate. Eztli’s heavy-handed approach would invite resentment. It was one thing to conquer their land and another to destroy their entire way of life. The islanders would fight back, even if outmatched. Since they had lost their armies, they would gut throats in the dark, set garrisons on fire, and make a nuisance of themselves. Their insurrection would be crushed in time—all were—but it would weaken Yohuachanca’s grip on the region in the short-term. “Besides,” Eztli murmured into my ear like a demon inspiring wicked sins. “All the wealth you seize from the islanders’ temples will go to you.” I quickly caught on to her suggestion. I could use the stolen gold for bribes to buy out allies closer to home. Eztli had always been mischievous, and undeath had only strengthened that trait into outright deviousness. I had two choices before me. Either rule unjustly in the hope of driving Yohuachanca’s people to revolt, or act as a merciful master in the hope that they would support me once I launched a coup against the Nightlords. I could already tell which one was more likely to happen. The people of Yohuachanca loved my predecessor. They loved him so much that they applauded when vampires tore out his heart. Love was a fickle throne to stand on. That must have been why the Nightlords had chosen to rule through fear. Or perhaps I could try to do both. Be a tyrant to those whose help I couldn’t expect to rise on my behalf, and be generous to those who could be useful to me. I needed allies in the palace and enemies at the borders. I had made my decision. I faced the priests and delivered my judgment. “Turkeys love a weak master who lets them wander around. In time, they forget to fear the hand that feeds them.” I joined my hands together. “The islanders require a sharp reminder of who truly rules this world.” The Jaguar Woman said my reign would be an age of darkness. Very well. Once I was done, historians would look to the centuries before as a golden age never to be seen again. “I shall ban the worship of the false gods all across the Boiling Sea!” I shouted with a genuine smirk. One of delight for the chaos to come. “Seize all their holdings! Melt down their gold and silver as gifts to the true gods, and tear down their temples so we might build new ones in their place! Any foreigner that refuses to cooperate shall be executed on the spot!” Before what had happened with Yoloxochitl, I would have hesitated to utter these words. They still tasted bitter in my mouth. But I had already committed to wage war on foreign soil. I had already bet on winning the ball game, so I might as well go all the way. “In fact, we shall not stop at the Boiling Sea!” I declared, trying to channel some of Yoloxochitl’s zealous madness in my voice. “Let this decree apply to all of Yohuachanca’s subjects, from north to south! For the sake of their immortal souls, we shall reform today’s sinners into tomorrow’s holy ones!” If Yohuachanca’s victims would not rise up once they saw their gods torn down, they never would at all. The red-eyed priests lacked the fangs of their vampiric overlords, but their smiles carried as many sinister overtones. “It shall be done, oh Godspeaker.” Beasts, all of them. I calmed down and slouched down on my throne. They do not need human blood to live, but they lust for it all the same. My loathsome decree was signed with a stroke of a quill, promising the obliteration of all the recently conquered people’s traditions. The priests, wisely expecting pushback, asked for military support, which I gave. The more spread out the empire’s troops were before the war with the Sapa began, the better. “Wise choice, Iztac,” Eztli whispered into my ear with a giggle. “I wonder how many will file a complaint over this.” Like most gods, I would see to it that these prayers never got answered. “What’s next on the agenda?” “A boring lecture,” Eztli replied with a sigh. “I am to brief you on the New Fire Ceremony and the other religious events of the year.” The New Fire Ceremony marked the end of the solar year and the renewal of the people’s pact with the First Emperor. To purify themselves of their sins from the old year, citizens would cast old clothes, hearthstones, and possessions into temple flames. A very special one, fueled by the remains of my predecessor, would be relinquished to the new emperor for five days. At sunset, on the very last day of the year, I would lead a procession of priests to Smoke Mountain in the east. Once I reached the summit, all fires in the empire except for my own sacred flame would be extinguished. This would mark the end of the old world. My sacred flame would light up a bonfire at Smoke Mountain’s top, and torches would be carried across all corners of the empire to signify the beginning of a new era. One that I hoped would see the Nightlords extinguished. However, the New Fire Ceremony would only be the first of seven major festivals I was to oversee. In two months, I would rule over the Rain Festival, where I would beseech the sky to bless our land with water through human sacrifices. Ceremonies would follow on Vernal Equinox, but they would be but a prelude to the much larger Maize Festival, the year’s most beloved and important ceremony behind that of the Scarlet Moon. There I would ensure a good harvest by deflowering virgins, planting seeds in the earth, and partaking in human sacrifices. The Summer Solstice would also host its own ceremony—the Masked Festival, where I would dress as the First Emperor in a play recreating Yohuachanca’s mythical founding. I would kill impersonators of my long-gone predecessors' enemies as human sacrifices. The fall equinox would host yet another Harvest Festival, which for once wouldn’t involve human sacrifice. Instead, I would slaughter sacred animals as a symbolic representation of my subjects’ sins and assist in an empire-wide sweeping ceremony meant to purify the land of evil. And finally… I would be sacrificed on the night of the Scarlet Moon. Hearing this list of rituals from Eztli’s mouth soured my stomach. I was only four days into my tenure, though it had felt like four months to me. The year’s planning promised one atrocity after another. “So I will take care of a sacred flame for the next five days?” I summarized. Worse, from what I understood, I would ascend to Smoke Mountain’s summit while caked in ashes. “Wonderful.” “Pretty much,” Eztli confirmed. “You start tomorrow. Priests will help you keep it ablaze, but you’re expected to do most of the work.” Considering what I was planning, I doubted I would have much time for fire-stoking. The ceremony did present an opportunity—namely, the last day’s procession would allow me to leave the palace and spend the night on Smoke Mountain. Eztli guessed what I had in mind. “Don’t get your hopes up,” she whispered, too low for others to listen. “The old bats will watch over your shoulder until dawn. For your own good, of course. A child shouldn’t wander outside without his parents’ supervision.” I scoffed. From the disdainful way she worded it, this sentence came straight out of Yoloxochitl’s mouth. I wished I could burn her with her own so-called “sacred flame.” At least this promenade would give me a breath of fresh air outside the palace. “I’ve never climbed Smoke Mountain,” I murmured. “Must be a pretty beautiful sight from all the way up there,” Eztli replied with a strange, distant look. “I hope I can see it too.” “I don’t see any reason why you can’t come,” I said. “We could go watch the night sky as we used to. Smoke Mountain is said to be so tall that its peak looms above the clouds.” Eztli smiled back at me. “You are sweet, Iztac.” Unlike her words, her eyes were utterly without joy. It filled my heart with worry. “What’s wrong?” “Nothing,” Eztli answered with a tone that implied otherwise. “It will make for a nice date.” It would have, under normal circumstances. The thought of Yoloxochitl and her sisters watching over us while we enjoyed a tender moment atop Smoke Mountain did not appeal to me much, but I had to make do with what I had. “What is the next item on the agenda?” I asked one of my priestly attendants to move on, since the subject clearly made Eztli uncomfortable. “Next month’s marriages, oh Godspeaker.” The priests unrolled entire scrolls full of names and dates. “As emperor, you possess the right of the first night of any new bride-to-be.” I knew what was coming, but it still took all of my strength to hide my disgust. The idea of forcing myself on innocent women only inspired horror in my heart. At least waging war on the Sapa would serve a greater purpose. “I will abstain.” “You shouldn’t,” Eztli said. I scowled at her, both in shock and horror. “Are you approving this…” I struggled to string the words together. “This debauchery?” “Iztac, don’t you see the bright side?” She leaned in closer to whisper into my ear once more. “It will let you exit the palace.” My jaw clenched so tightly that my teeth started to hurt. Of course, an emperor would not organize a commoner’s wedding for them. They would be hosted and feasted on by the married families, adding insult to injury. Even so… I failed to even entertain the thought. At least until Eztli provided an interesting solution. “You don’t have to deflower the bride-to-be, silly,” she pointed out. “You can simply choose to attend and complain once you find her beauty beneath your imperial standards. Then you spend the evening in revelry far away from the old bats’ gaze.” That… might actually work. Who could blame me if I traveled to a wedding, realized that the bride I visited did not live up to the tales, and then decided to grace the two families anyway with my presence? It would offer an opportunity to exit the palace now and then, perhaps to meet with allies outside its walls. It was best to do that only occasionally. If I witnessed too many weddings without exercising my “rights,” the Nightlords were bound to grow suspicious. “How…” I cleared my throat as I questioned the priests further. “How does this even work? There must be thousands upon thousands of unions each year across the empire. How would one even begin to select them?” As it turned out, the imperial bureaucracy had solved the issue many centuries ago. All weddings in the empire were prepared months early with the priesthood’s benediction, since the latter kept strict records on genealogy and bloodlines. Due to distance, they only selected choices from among the capital and its surrounding region—though I could exercise my “right” on a whim anywhere if I traveled to another part of the empire. Afterward, the priests sorted the “candidates” by age, keeping only those between sixteen and thirty, and weighted bloodlines with “appreciable traits”—health, beauty, and intelligence. Finally, priority was given to families who invited the emperor to the festivities. “Invitations?” I thought I had misheard for a moment. “Are some families inviting me to bed their brides and daughters?” The priests nodded as one, much to my bafflement. “Many do, oh Godspeaker. After all, is there no greater honor for a family to be graced with your divine presence?” “In fact, Iztac, you received more invitations than the month has days,” Eztli mused. The situation appeared to amuse her as much as it disturbed me. “You will have to deny most of them.” I sank deeper into my throne, trying my best to grasp the situation. I struggled to understand why anyone would invite me… until I remembered the night of the Scarlet Moon. How could I forget the hopeful visages of so many men eager to be chosen as emperor while Guatemoc and I trembled with dread? Or how many applauded when the Nightkin carried me screaming to the Blood Pyramid? For most of Yohuachanca’s citizens, being chosen as the year’s emperor was the highest honor. I had become more than a man—I was a conduit connecting the false gods of the empire to their mortal subjects. The chosen sacrifice that was meant to keep the sun alight. An emperor visiting a peasant family meant the Nightlords smiled kindly on them. Many would see it as a great honor—nay, a blessing—rather than a curse. Such was the strength of the vampires’ hold on my people. They had managed to turn cuckolding into a divine miracle. I miss the Land of the Dead Suns. The dead aren’t half as foolish as the living. “I will think about it,” I replied evasively. “More urgent matters demand my attention for now.” The priests bowed before me. “Remember, oh Godspeaker, that all mortals serve at your leisure.” “You might not realize it yet, Iztac, but fathering more blessed children is your holiest duty,” Yoloxochitl had once told me. Her words echoed in my ears like the Yaotzin’s curses. “Your sacred blood must keep flowing. Your seed enriches any soil in which it is planted.” They do have a strange obsession with the emperor’s children. Enough to allow their puppets to leave their cage on occasion if it meant making more of them. I haven’t heard of any would-be prince or princess who has distinguished himself to warrant these efforts. Come to think of it… I’d never heard a word of any emperor’s children. How odd. I knew daughters were secluded inside the imperial harem, but sons were ostensibly sent to join the army. Yet I couldn’t remember any general or famed warrior with imperial ancestry. Not a single one. Lady Sigrun’s lies about her son’s fate made that doubly suspicious, alongside the Yaotzin’s insistence that the truth would fetch a high price. Were they sent to the altar on their way out of the palace? I didn’t remember any imperial prince being sacrificed, though it might be because I never bothered to look it up. Eztli shouldn’t have any issue identifying them among the priests’ records if that were the case. What do the Nightlords need the emperor’s sons for? I would need to ask the Parliament of Skulls for details tomorrow. I had a bad feeling about this matter—a terrible intuition that something sinister was afoot behind the scenes. This impression wouldn’t leave me for the entire morning, enough that I struggled to focus on the justice cases I had been expected to solve today. The first was relatively boring—a succession dispute over the inheritance of Xochipilli, a prominent merchant from Quetzaltenango. The man had perished without a clear heir. According to the priest’s reports, his first wife’s son, Tlazohtzin, argued that he should inherit due to being the oldest heir, while the second wife’s son, Tlaxcala, argued that since his mother was of higher social status, their father meant to give him everything. Local magistrates failed to deliver a verdict, so they petitioned me for my judgment. Eztli appeared as bored as I was by the reports. “You should seize the father’s assets and be done with it,” she suggested. “This should teach them the danger of wasting our time.” I was tempted to go along with the suggestion, but that would achieve little except disinheriting both families. I forced myself to think the situation over. I had so little time and so few powers of my own that I couldn’t let any opportunity pass. How would my predecessors suggest that I act in this situation? “What made Xochipilli such a powerful merchant?” I questioned the priests. “The late Xochipilli owned all inns within Quetzaltenango’s limits, alongside its brothels and breweries,” one of them answered. “In his later age, he started to buy similar establishments in other cities, including Your Divine Majesty’s capital.” This aroused my curiosity enough to shake me out of my distraction. So far, I had focused on fostering unrest in the empire, but I also required allies outside the palace’s walls. Sigrun had proved to me how valuable a web of agents could be. This judgment might offer me an opportunity to start building my own. Whoever receives my benediction will be grateful to me personally. Maybe I could leverage it somehow. “Are both of Xochipilli’s sons in the capital?” I asked the priests, who both nodded. As expected, they had made the journey just in case I requested an audience. “I shall receive them tomorrow and give them a chance to plead their cases personally.” “As you wish, oh supreme emperor,” the priests answered while Eztli rolled her eyes in annoyance. She hated dragging things on. The next case involved a heated dispute between the cities of Huitzilampa and Tonalco over a fertile patch of land between their territories. While the former intended to put it to use for agricultural purposes, the latter wanted to start a mining operation. Both cities’ rulers argued that they had an ancestral right to the location, and rather than risk angering either of them, the magistrates referred the matter to the emperor’s judgment. I immediately smelled a chance to sow discord. Much like Xochipilli’s inheritance, I summoned both sides to plead their cases during the week through representatives. “What are you waiting for?” Eztli murmured to me in annoyance. “The best offer,” I answered bluntly. This caused her to smirk. “I knew you would make an excellent merchant.” “Thank you.” I sighed as the audience came to an end. “In any case, I am spent.” Eztli nodded happily. We were done for the day. “I will hunt down Ingrid’s missing brother in the meantime,” she murmured into my ear. “Take good care of Mother for me, and little Nenetl too.” “Nenetl?” I repeated. I expected Eztli to ask me to look after Necahual, but not a fellow consort. “I like her.” Eztli gently stroked my hair. “She reminds me of you a few years back. All sweet and innocent.” “I was never so gentle.” “You were,” Eztli replied with a chuckle. “Only somewhere along the way, you learned the meaning of bitterness.” I had no answer to that. “Mind if I ask you for a favor, Eztli?” “Another missing child to hunt?” What do the Nightlords do with the emperor’s sons? The question was on the edge of my lips, but I held back. I had a more pressing matter to deal with. “Could you ensure there are fewer eyes looking at us this evening? I would like to enjoy a more private moment with Nenetl. I believe she deserves that at least.” I expected Eztli to crack a joke about that “private time,” much like what happened with Ingrid. Instead, though, she studied my face before answering. She knew me all too well. “Of course.” After the audience, I briefly reviewed the statue project with Ingrid—the final expense ought to be as ridiculous as it was unnecessary—and then enjoyed a short meal with Lady Sigrun and Necahual in the former’s room. While Necahual remained on edge from start to finish, barely eating her food or saying anything, Lady Sigrun did her best to help her break out of her shell. She asked questions about her life in Acampa, confided about her own past, and questioned her about medicines that would help Astrid focus on her lessons… which eventually broke through to Eztli’s bitter mother. “I can brew passionflower potions for you,” Necahual suggested kindly. While she had only ever shown me bitterness in the past, she took her healer duties seriously. “It will soothe your daughter’s nerves.” “Thank you,” Lady Sigrun replied graciously, though I suspected she already knew the plant’s properties. “Astrid can hardly stay still for five minutes before her mind wanders somewhere else. Not even the gods can command her attention.” “Speaking of gods,” I said, my eyes gazing at her private shrine and the strange sigils carved on it. “What are those symbols meant to represent?” “Those are runes,” Lady Sigrun explained. “In my homeland, these marks represent the gods and invite their protection.” Is that why you secretly carved them on your pristine flesh? I still wondered how she managed to hide them. Necahual’s eyes widened at the confession. “You worship foreign gods inside the palace?” Lady Sigrun’s smile turned mischievous. “Winland’s gods and those of Yohuachanca are the same. Our cultures simply gave them different names. I simply worship the Nightlords in my own way.” The lie was so flawlessly executed that it could have come out of a priest’s lips. Neither Necahual nor I were blind to the truth, but we did not question it. “What…” Necahual cleared her throat, as if afraid to ask. “What gods does this shrine pay homage to?” “The goddess of beauty and the goddess of death,” Lady Sigrun explained. “You know them as Iztacoatl, the White Snake, and Ocelocihuatl, the Jaguar Woman.” Beauty and death… What an interesting combination. I had wondered how she managed to stay so beautiful at her age and what trickery she used to slay Tlacaelel. I had the suspicion that both events were connected somehow. Lady Sigrun had to be a witch of some kind. Not a powerful one, or else she would have sensed my Gaze spell. And I hardly believed the Nightlords would have let a sorceress operate in their midst for so long if she possessed any aptitude that could directly threaten them. The fact she could hide the runes on her skin from mortals attested to her true nature. This made me wonder if she had taught Ingrid anything. “I’m afraid I will have to leave soon,” I said now that we had emptied our plates. “Nenetl must be waiting for me.” “I understand, my emperor.” Lady Sigrun met my gaze. “Do you have time for a song before leaving?” I nodded sharply, and Lady Sigrun hastily clapped her hands. Astrid walked into the room with a smaller, handheld version of her sister’s harp instrument. Necahual was about as surprised as I was. “What kind of tool is this?” she asked Astrid, who shyly smiled back. She probably wasn’t too used to strangers. “A lyre,” Sigrun answered on her daughter’s behalf. “Astrid, would you kindly play a song for your brother-in-law? Something joyful.” “Yes, Mother.” Astrid pinched the instrument’s strings and started playing an upbeat melody. She was less talented than her sister at music, but her lyre provided enough noise to give us privacy. While Necahual was focused on the song itself, Lady Sigrun leaned closer to my side of the table and went straight to the point. “Who will you choose among Xochipilli’s heirs?” she whispered into my ear. That she knew the details of an audience only priests were privy to didn’t surprise me in the slightest. “Are you not going to suggest a pick?” “No,” Lady Sigrun replied as she poured me a cup of chocolate. “Instead, I expect Your Majesty to tell me which of them he intends to voice his support for ahead of time, so I can accept the winning bid.” Her words drew a smile from me. “Is it not a sin to take credit for work one hasn’t done?” “It would be a greater sin to appear fallible,” Lady Sigrun replied unabashedly. “Besides, I would be in your debt.” “Duly noted.” I saw no reason to deny her wish. “My contact also provided an answer to your test.” I recounted to Sigrun what the Yaotzin told me while paying close attention to her mannerisms. My mother-in-law’s face gave nothing away—it might as well have been made of marble—but I noticed her eyes briefly blinked when I mentioned Mazatl’s daughter. She was good—very good—but not perfect. I might learn to read her better with time. “I am surprised,” Sigrun said, and for once she appeared entirely truthful. “Few even know that the man has a daughter, let alone her name. He is a very private person. The fact that you learned this information within a day’s time, if it proves correct…” “Once it proves correct,” I insisted. The Yaotzin never lied. While I couldn’t rule out the possibility that Mazatl’s daughter didn’t go along with his wishes, I doubted the wind wouldn’t have informed me. Like any good merchant, it required repeat customers. “Did the Nightkin tell you?” Lady Sigrun asked. I smiled in response without giving anything away. “You have grown better at hiding your thoughts, Lord Iztac.” “I will take that as a compliment.” “It is one.” “Thank you.” I noticed Necahual turning away from Astrid’s song and squinting at us. She probably figured out we were scheming together, but wisely did not mention it. “I do wonder why you need that information though.” She smiled at me. “The answer might cost you.” Ever the opportunist, I see. “I will pass for now.” I was more interested in her runes anyway. “I have another request for you.” Lady Sigrun glanced at Necahual, who returned her gaze. “You want me to look after her now that her daughter has grown distant.” “You are quite astute,” I complimented her. From the way Necahual stared at us, she had guessed what we had whispered about. “Can I count on your support?” “I shall teach her court etiquette in return for your assistance in the Xochipilli case,” Lady Sigrun promised with a sharp edge in her gaze. “It is getting late, Emperor Iztac. Your consort must be waiting for you.” Indeed. I loudly thanked Lady Sigrun for the meal and song, kissed her daughter Astrid on the forehead, and did the same with Necahual’s cheek. “Be wary,” I whispered to her, too low for our host to hear. “She is an ally for now, but a fickle one.” Necahual bit her lower lip without answering, her nod almost imperceptible. She was a novice at this game, but she had good instincts. A lifetime of keeping her emotions bottled up inside her heart probably helped. I am starting to get it. I left Sigrun’s chambers with guards shadowing my steps. How this game is played. The world of the living and that of the dead did not differ much. In both cases, one had to first give in order to receive in turn. Everything I did on behalf of another should have a price attached to it. The right information was worth more than gold, and there was nothing more precious than trust. These were simple rules to follow. At least so far. Nenetl’s chambers, as befitting those of a consort, were located within a short distance of mine. I immediately noticed a strong smell of cacao when I approached its barkwood door. “Nenetl?” I raised my hand to knock on the door, but a guard did it for me. “Are you there?” I heard her answer from the other side with a trembling voice. “C-C-Come in!” I exchanged a glance with one of the guards, who opened the door. “Keep watch outside,” I told them after crossing the threshold. “I will call for you if I need it.” Though I suspected they would rush in on their own by the evening’s end. I intended to make noise. Unlike Lady Sigrun and Ingrid’s tidy apartments, Nenetl’s quarters reminded me of the capital’s chaotic marketplace. The antechamber alone was a spacious hall of shelves filled with maize, squash, and, most of all, cacao beans. The smell of it was almost intoxicating, and I nearly stumbled on a grinding stone filled with chocolate. From the look of it, Nenetl had to have stopped midway through the process. “I’m so sorry!” I heard Nenetl apologize from two rooms over. “I am so sorry, my lord, my emperor, I—The oven is not working properly! I’m sorry!” “The oven?” I blinked in astonishment as I followed her voice. “You have a kitchen in your quarters?” “A-A small one, yes!” She was cooking for herself? In a palace with thousands of servants? Nenetl’s constant litany of apologies led me straight into her quarters’ main room, a large hall with a central table surrounded by scattered board games and other exotic decorations. Exquisitely crafted patolli boards with jade pieces waited next to a miniature replica of a ballgame court whose wooden players were held by sticks. Ceramic pots were piled in a corner next to painted dolls, bizarre clay figurines, obsidian mirrors, and a collection of various shiny stones with as many colors as the rainbow. I failed to find a pattern of any sort. I couldn’t even identify half the trinkets in this room. However, none of the strange items in Nenetl’s collection could stand up to the Sapa tablet. As per my orders, my servants had transported it to Nenetl’s apartments, though since it was ten feet high and half as wide, they had to put it sideways to fit it inside the hall. It remained as impressive as the day the ambassadors presented it to me, with its smooth volcanic stone surface covered in silver patterns mimicking the sky. An eclipsed sun of an obsidian stone circled with gold occupied the design’s center. What did the Sapa call it again? The Chaskarumi? Its surface felt strangely warm when my fingers brushed against it. They said they used it to calculate the movement of the stars... It was the eclipsed sun that fascinated me the most, however. I almost imagined the Chalchiuhtlicue’s dead one in its place, a purple circle raining tears onto a grim god’s skull. How would the Sapa have represented Tlalocan’s sky? A sapphire surrounded by burning rubies? “I am so sorry, my Lord Iztac.” I turned my head to the side to see Nenetl walk out of an obsidian archway to my left. I caught a glimpse of a stone oven behind her. “I-I wanted to bake cacao sweets for you, but the fire… the fire is not… good enough…” “I told you, call me Iztac, and skip the lord part,” I replied with a warm smile. “I’ve got enough flatterers to compensate.” I meant it as a joke, terrible as it was, but it only caused her further distress. “I… I’m sorry. I forgot.” I sighed and studied Nenetl. I had expected the most shy of my consorts to wear a dress or something formal—the way Ingrid had when I visited her mother. Instead, she welcomed me in a common, dirtied sleeveless blouse covered in chocolate stains, and she had soot on her white hair and hands. “You need not apologize, Nenetl,” I reassured her. The wolf inside her was buried very deep. “But, forgive me for asking… Why do you have a kitchen in your quarters?” “I, uh, I cooked for the priests all my life.” She smiled shyly, her fingers trembling. “It… calms me when I’m stressed.” Considering how she looked, it didn’t help much. “I apologize if I put pressure on you,” I said. “I intended for today’s afternoon to be a relaxing moment.” “No, no, this is all my fault, I—” Nenetl blushed enough to turn her pale skin scarlet. “It’s the first time I’ve hosted someone.” “Truly?” I squinted at the dozen or so games she had lying around. “What are these for, then?” “I, uh…” Somehow Nenetl became even redder. “I… I mostly play against myself. I switch from one chair to another.” That was both strangely adorable and terribly sad. If anything, though, it made me appreciate her more. She is painfully awkward and transparent, but it is all genuine. “Well, now you have a partner,” I replied with amusement. “But you’ll have to teach me how to play most of these.” “Yes, yes, of course.” Nenelt nodded joyfully. “I have patolli, Sapa games, that new Board & Conquest from the north. Which one would you like to try first, lor—Iztac?” “Surprise me.” I hoped that by encouraging her to take charge, she would grow more comfortable around me. “We have the afternoon and evening ahead of us.” “Oh, then we can try the Sapa games,” she happily suggested. Her eyes turned toward the Chaskarumi. “They are almost as pretty as this tablet.” “I like it very much,” I confirmed. Though I would have to destroy it by the evening’s end. All the pieces were now in place. I activated the Gaze and the Veil spells in tandem. I immediately felt the weight of others’ attention on my shoulders. Nenetl, a rat hiding within the walls… and someone else. This third presence immediately put me on edge. My entire plan revolved around deceiving a handful of people with my Veil spell. The more onlookers present, the greater the risk of failure. Moreover, the presence was close. So close that it might as well have been… Standing right in front of me. I turned my sun-empowered eyes toward the Chaskarumi. My Gaze spell dispelled the illusions that covered its surface. The stars remained as sparkling as ever, shining lines of metal in a sea of blackened stone. But the eclipsed sun… The obsidian stone at the center of the tablet had grown a reddish, vertical line in its middle. The golden circle’s curves had stretched left and right into a familiar shape. The same one I saw each morning when I cleaned before an obsidian mirror. An eye. Someone was observing us through the tablet. Good. As I thought that, a smile appeared on my lips. This would make things so much easier. Keep watching. You will like what you see. part0021. 16THE PLOT Avicious battle raged on a board of wood. Two teams of six warriors faced one another along square-shaped tracks. Each of these six had been chosen among hundreds to represent a god in this sacred confrontation. Half of the contestants had already crossed the finish line. Two of the opposing runners were so close that they could see it. They jumped from square to square in an attempt to overcome their rival, for the glory of their patron deities. A racer overcame the other through a burst of speed, jumping across six squares in a single leap… only for the ground to collapse beneath his feet and reveal a pit of pitch-black darkness. Only the gods could save him now. “Your token has landed on a black square,” Nenelt noted as a roll of the dice, putting my figurine in jeopardy. “You must send it back to the beginning.” “I activate my protection tumi,” I said, dramatically raising an amulet representing a smiling totem. “It protects my token from harmful effects.” “It would… if I didn’t have a cursed tumi!” Nenetl viciously flipped a skull-topped amulet she had won early in the game. “It negates your tumi’s effect and forces you to discard it!” “You snake!” I cursed as my figurine went all the way back to square one. It hurt all the more since it had been about four spots away from the finish line. “Did you sit on that tumi for an hour while waiting for this exact opportunity?” “I’m sorry,” Nenetl said with amusement as she cruelly rolled the dice. Her hand moved her fifth figurine past the finish line and crushed my hopes. “Better luck next time.” Of all the board games played in Yohuachanca, none matched patolli in popularity. The game was played on a cross-shaped board whose four arms were each divided into twelve squares, and two to four players could participate at once. To win, a player needed to move six pieces around the board. How movements were determined depended on the players’ wealth. I had only ever played it with Eztli by rolling marked beans, while I had seen rich merchants use wooden dice. As befitting an emperor’s consort, Nenetl used a silver die and ivory figurines on an exquisitely crafted wooden board. Specific squares possessed special effects, such as forcing a piece all the way back to the beginning, disrupting a player’s moves, or skipping squares. As it turned out, the Sapa Empire played a variant of the game called “tumi.” The rules were nearly the same, but with a major change—if a player’s pieces landed on specific squares, they could select one of the eponymous tumis from a set of ten. These small trinkets, which took the form of semicircular bronze blades topped by a totemic visage crafted from precious metals and stone, possessed unique powers that a player could call upon at will once per session. It would take me more than luck to win this game. I had only managed to put two figurines past the finish line, while Nenetl was one token away from victory. She had already won the previous two games as well. To my astonishment, my consort’s behavior completely changed once at the gaming table. Her shyness and awkwardness were gone. Both had drowned to death in a flood of competitiveness that the girl had held back deep within her heart. Perhaps she wasn’t such a wallflower deep down. “Here I go again,” I said while rolling the dice. I advanced my token by six steps and landed right on a tumi square. The true gods had smiled on me at last. “Perfect.” “There are only three tumis left,” Nenelt said as she presented me with the various trinkets still available—a masked trickster, a jaguar, and an eyeless crone. “The trap tumi, the jaguar tumi, and the seer tumi.” “I’ll take the mighty jaguar.” The jaguar tumi made it so that when one of my figurines caught up to one of Nenetl’s, it would send it back to square one once by “eating” it and let me roll a second dice in a row. Considering the current state of the board, it would be more useful than the other options. I admitted I preferred playing tumi over patolli. Patolli was mostly a game of luck; you had little control over the board besides rolling the beans and dice, so you either prayed to the gods fervently enough for them to listen or bit your tongue at your rotten luck. In a way, it fit the realm of the Nightlords quite well. Tumi gave players many more options. Not only could they choose any of the amulets when they landed on the right square, they also needed to play them at the right times to maximize their odds of victory. Nenetl had sat on her cursed tumi for many turns to better crush my hopes at the right time. I suppose it’s appropriate. I thought as my third token chased after Nenetl’s last. The Nightlords think that my life's a game of patolli, when in truth I’m playing tumi. I could only hope my spells could secure my future victory. As Nenetl very clearly stated from the beginning, no single tumi guaranteed victory. They only made it more likely. In the end, my token managed to catch up to Nenetl’s piece and send it back to square one. It let me put a third figurine past the finish line, though that wasn’t enough to prevail. “I win again,” Nenetl rejoiced as she moved her final token past the finish line after another twenty minutes of play. “Sorry.” For once, she said it with a proud smile rather than an awkward expression. Good. She was starting to grow more comfortable around me. “Excellent game,” I congratulated her. “Seems like I have some training to do to catch up to you.” “Don’t beat yourself over it, I’ve played it for years,” Nenetl reassured me. “You are learning quickly too, Iztac. Give it a couple more sessions, and you’ll be the one beating me.” I noticed that she no longer stammered when speaking my name. I supposed there was no better way for a girl to build up confidence than by defeating her husband at board games. So far, we had played patolli, bul, the miniature ballgame, and multiple rounds of tumi. The last one held my attention the longest so far, beyond its use for my plan. “What are these tumi supposed to represent?” I wondered out loud. “Foreign gods?” “I think so,” Nenetl confirmed, though her smile appeared a little strained this time. “They have more than we do.” “So the tumis represent the gods answering the Sapa people’s prayers,” I guessed. I stroked my chin to look halfway wise for my audience’s sake. I had seen old people do this to appear smarter than they actually were. “Interesting… Very interesting.” Realizing that we were taking a pause from the game, Nenetl set aside the board and game pieces. “Did… Did playing this game help you understand the Sapa more?” “I think so,” I replied. “This might determine how we invade them.” I immediately sensed an invisible presence’s attention coming from the tablet. Though I had canceled the Gaze spell due to its harmful effects on my eyes if I used it too long, I kept the Veil up in a very subtle way by slightly altering one of my clothes' feathers’ color. This change barely required any mental effort on my part, but it allowed me to sense how many onlookers observed me… and how intensely. You’ve been waiting days for this moment, haven't you? I thought while observing the tablet from the corner of my eye. Whatever wizard spied on me, I hoped his superiors treated him better than mine. “See, Nenetl, if the Sapa people believe that their gods will answer their prayers in times of trouble, it means we could focus on destroying their temples first,” I explained. “If their deities fail to protect them in their hour of need, or worse, fold before our own, it would break their spirit.” I sincerely hoped the Sapa’s deities would indeed shield them from Yohuachanca’s, but I didn’t expect much. Xolotl did warn me that all the true gods were dead and gone. “I… I suppose it would.” Nenetl shifted on her cushion. Our current subject of conversation unsettled her. “Are we… I mean, are you…” “Set on starting a war?” I sighed, somewhat sincerely. “What other choices do we have? The Nightlords spoke clearly to me. Either I shed foreign blood or my subjects would pay the price. Our citizens’ safety takes priority.” “I understand, but…” Nenetl joined her hands, her fingers trembling. “Could we… I do not know, ask for volunteers?” “All of those already perished on the Scarlet Moon’s eve.” It wasn’t even a lie. The rare zealots ready to die for their faith already surrendered their lives before I even sat on my throne. “Moreover, this war would benefit our country. The Sapa Empire is on the brink of collapse, its wealth ripe for the taking.” The oppressive feeling coming from the Chaskarumi strengthened further. This confirmed that whoever spied on me from afar could both see and listen. “I don’t think we’ll ever get a better chance to take them down,” I insisted, trying to make it sound like a regrettable necessity. “They are divided, their coast is undefended, and they think they can buy their way out of trouble.” I waved a hand at the Chaskarumi. “This tablet alone is proof enough of it. Gifts do not buy safety.” I was giving away as much information on the coming campaign as I could without arousing suspicion. If they had any sense, the Sapa spies in charge of observing me would report everything to their superiors. “I’m sorry, Lor—Iztac.” Nenetl’s moment of confidence had passed. Now she seemed unable to meet my gaze. “But… Can I ask you a question?” “Of course, Nenetl.” The situation was eating away at her. “What is on your mind?” “If… we do as you say and conquer the Sapa Empire…” Nenetl gulped. “Then its people will become our subjects, right?” “Yes.” I frowned. “What of it?” “If the goddesses ask the next emperor to bring new tributes… they will have to invade another country.” I nodded sharply. If I failed to take down the Nightlords, the Three-Rivers Federation would surely become their newest target. “The world isn’t limitless. If we continue down this path… Yohuachanca will eventually conquer all of it.” She finally mustered enough bravery to meet my gaze. “Once all the people in the world become citizens of the empire…” she whispered, her eyes heavy with fear and sorrow. “Who will the future emperors sacrifice then?” Poor girl. If only I could tell her I felt the same way. The Nightlords’ greed and bloodthirst would never be sated. They would outgrow even the world. “I do not know,” I replied. “One way or another, we won’t be here to see it.” It was a complete lie. If I failed to bring down Yohuachanca, I would witness everything from atop a pillar of skulls. I would weep in guilt and shoulder the bitter sting of failure for centuries. “I understand, but…” Nenetl chewed her lip nervously. “I feel that we are only passing on the burden to another.” “We are,” I replied bluntly, causing her to flinch. I immediately regretted it. “Nenetl, what other options do we have? Sacrificing our own population?” “Is there… Maybe there is another way to feed the goddesses?” Nenetl suggested, but from her doubtful tone, she didn’t believe in it herself. “Perhaps… we could find an animal whose blood they can consume and… breed it?” They are already doing that… They are breeding humans. “You know as well as I do that the gods will not settle for turkeys, Nenetl. I wish there was another way too, but this has to be done.” “I know…” Nenetl let out a sigh. “I’m… I’m sorry… I know you’re trying to do your best as emperor, but… this feels wrong.” Because it was. “We must do as we must in this world. If another way presents itself, I will take it without a moment’s hesi⁠—” I stopped myself halfway through my speech. I straightened my back and clenched my fists, my heartbeat hastening. The moment had come for me to unveil my ploy; failure was not an option. Nenetl stared at me in confusion. “Iztac?” “Do you feel that?” I asked her, glancing around aimlessly and feigning suspicion. “Feel what?” “Something’s watching us.” My eyes wandered across the room and settled on the tablet. “It’s coming from there.” The pressure cast by the spying spell on my Veil intensified twofold. Whatever sorcerer observed me on the other side would have been wiser to simply drop it, but I remembered Huehuecoyotl’s lessons. The mind was easier to trick when it went into shock. “There’s…” I rose from my seat and pretended to examine the Chaskarumi more closely. “There’s something wrong with this tablet.” “Something wrong?” Nenetl asked, utterly confused. “It seems normal to me, Iztac. Pretty even.” “I’m not sure… I’m not sure myself.” I moved my hand on the tablet’s smooth surface. “I feel as though… as though we’re being watched.” If this tablet contained a trap, the moment to trigger it was now or never. Part of me hoped for it. It would spare me the trouble of injuring myself. Unfortunately, though the foreign gaze observing me through the tablet did not lessen in intensity, no magical spell stuck me where I stood. I expected as much. A device with offensive applications might not have survived the red-eyed priests’ scrutiny. The Sapa Empire’s sorcerers chose subtlety over force. But the Nightlords didn’t have to know that. I’m sorry. I silently apologized to all of the Sapa people. Forgive me. “Call the guards,” I said, my heart pounding in my chest. The moment of truth had come. “There’s something wrong about the tablet⁠—” Smoke poured out from the Chaskarumi’s eclipsed sun. Or at least, that was how Nenetl and the spy in the walls perceived it. My Veil spell expanded beyond my body to cover the tablet and myself in its embrace. The strain on my mind grew stronger as I wove my illusion into the world. I shaped a cloud of purple mists from nothing, a swirling abyss of eldritch magic erupting from the tablet like a volcano. Shining red eyes opened within the whirlpool and glared at me. This is it. My heart pounded so hard in my chest that I could hear the beat echoing in my skull. Better make it convincing. Everything devolved into planned chaos. I collapsed on my back, faking paralysis and helplessness. Nenetl shrieked in terror before I even hit the floor. The two guards outside flung the door open and barged into the gaming hall with their obsidian clubs. Perhaps they had expected to confront a human assassin who had managed to sneak into the apartments. Nothing could have prepared them for what I had conjured. Huehuecoyotl warned me that the more shocking an illusion, the more it threw onlookers off their game. While they might eventually grow to disbelieve what their own eyes showed them, there would be a brief moment when their minds were so taken aback that it would suspend all logic and skepticism. A bird falling off a tree didn’t have time to consider whether or not the ground would kill them or not. Their instinct drove them to fly away. For a brief second, all the weight that had previously poured onto my Veil spell vanished. Disbelief, skepticism, confusion—all were washed away by a tide of terror as a terrifying monster materialized in the comfortable room. The smoke coalesced into a twisted horror with two gaunt limbs ending in three razor-sharp claws. I took inspiration from the creature I had encountered in the Underworld and built upon its monstrosity with all the details I had learned from the Sapa’s culture over the last few days. I gave this creature a ghoulish mask based on the tumis, topped with a dozen red eyes shining like stars, a bent, ugly shape, and a dozen screaming faces for skin. I had long thought over what shape my illusionary creature should take. In the end, I settled on a monstrous ghost. After all, they worshiped their ancestors and feared their displeasure, while the Nightlords thought themselves above it. It felt… appropriate. For all onlookers, a monster straight out of the Underworld’s darkest depths had materialized in half of its horrifying glory. Its torso remained bound to the tablet, as if the horror was stuck through a doorway. I had the illusion lunge at me with a shriek. To their credit, the guards immediately moved to protect me. They had trained for years to protect their emperor, and their predecessors’ fate at Yoloxochitl’s hungry fangs only impressed upon them the consequences of failure. The Spiritual Manifestation and Veil spells were antithetical to each other in a way. The former required my Tonalli to take physical shape in the world; the latter required it to stay immaterial. Using both at once exhausted me quicker than carrying loads of stone during battle training at school, yet I persevered nonetheless. My empowered Teyolia burned within my chest. The divine energies within it fueled my magic the same way a beating heart helped my lungs gather air. Its flames let me materialize my Tonalli’s talons and cloak them in a veneer of illusion. To outsiders, my talons appeared like two of the monster’s clawed hands. They tore out a guard’s throat with such strength that his head went rolling at poor Nenetl’s feet. His blood surged from his severed neck and painted my robes red. I felt a little guilty upon hearing Nenetl’s screeching screams, but only a little. I felt little to no pressure on my Veil spell anymore. Now that it had claimed a victim, the monster appeared all too real. Even the mysterious sorcerer spying on me through the tablet felt utterly entranced by the gory spectacle. The remaining guard froze upon seeing his comrade’s corpse collapse at his feet and then attempted to behead my illusion with a swing of his weapon. His obsidian blade phased through my monster’s misty neck without inflicting damage. The man’s disbelief lasted a second before my talons sank into his chest. My claws tore through his cotton armor and flesh alike. They ripped his ribs open in a waterfall of blood and organs, his guts spilling onto the floor. Serves you right. I thought as I watched my second captor collapse onto the ground in a state of shock. Thankfully, the strain of maintaining my corporeal talons twisted what would have been a gleeful smirk into a pained expression. Now, if only more would come more swiftly. I can’t maintain this for long… Warm hands grabbed my shoulders, drawing me out of my trance. “Get up!” Nenetl shouted in panic. She vainly attempted to drag me across the floor and away from the creature. “Iztac, please, we need to go!” Anyone else would have fled in fear in her stead. Instead, kind Nenetl chose to shelter me. I would have whispered words of admiration for her surprising bravery if it didn’t risk ruining my devious plan. “Run,” I whispered for both of our sake. I no longer sensed the spy in the wall, which meant the Nightlords would send reinforcements any minute now. “Run.” I needed her to flee. If the monster avoided harming her, it would raise suspicions I could have done without. Please Nenetl, leave me here… She did not. Nenetl’s hands gripped my shoulders with surprising strength. I had the monster glare at her and raise its arms threateningly in the hope it would break her resolve. Instead, she moved between the creature and me for a reason I could not fathom. I couldn’t believe my own eyes. Nenetl was trembling and shaking like a tree, her clothes drenched in guard blood, her breathing so strong and intense it would have put a longneck to shame… yet here she stood in front of me, arms raised to protect the puppetmaster from his own creation. She was trembling and terrified, but she still attempted to protect me. I never had anyone try to protect me in the past besides Eztli, so… I had to admit—I was moved. If only it didn’t risk ruining everything! My monster couldn’t be seen sparing the emperor’s consort from harm after murdering two guards. I had my creature tower over her threateningly, to no avail. Nenetl had frozen in place in a mix of utter fright and determination. Nenetl, please be a coward this time. I apologized in my heart as I had the monster raise a claw. With luck, she would flee. Otherwise… I would do my best to merely scratch her. Just jump out of the way! My creature brought down its claws, aiming to strike me and only lightly graze Nenetl’s skin, only for a dreadful tension to fill the room. I stopped my creature midswing as a raw sensation of danger wrapped its icy fingers around my heart. For a moment, I thought the Nightlords had materialized somewhere in the room at the edge of my gaze. A low, bestial growl told me otherwise. Nenetl was trembling, but not from fear. Her pale blue eyes glowed with a vivid, eerie light while her mouth grew fangs in between her teeth. I watched on, astonished, as new muscles bulged from her flesh and stretched her petite frame enough to tear off her clothes. Wild silvery fur sprouted all over her pale skin, and her nails protruded into sharp claws. The beast Nenetl had become snarled at my illusion with a snout and a maw full of fangs. She towered over the false monster that previously overshadowed her. What… Now it was my turn to learn terror, as my breath slowed down and my blood turned cold. What is this? Nenetl lunged at my creature with a savage roar. My illusion dispelled on its own, as did my talons. Both dissipated into a cloud of smoke as Nenetl shattered the tablet with a single blow. Black stones flew across the hall, with some bouncing off my chest, alongside silver stars and the golden circle that used to represent the eclipsed sun. Nenetl snarled and raged, her mighty hands punching the leftover rocks into scraps and pebbles. The very ground trembled from her sheer strength. Is that Spiritual Manifestation? No, she did not manifest her Tonalli outside her body. She became it. Or it took her over because of the stress. Thankfully, no one was left to notice my deception. The walled spy had long left to seek allies, and I felt the Sapa sorcerer’s invisible presence disappear with the Chaskarumi’s destruction. As for Nenetl, she was too maddened to care. In fact, I started fearing for my own life. When she finally stopped smashing what remained of the Chaskrarumi, the wolf-human hybrid Nenetl had turned into faced me with cold, hungry eyes. She reached over eight feet tall in her current state, towering over me like how an adult would cast a child in its shadow. Her hands could hold and crush my skull in their palms. I doubted she would need to. Her fanged maw could tear me apart in an instant. “Nenetl…” I whispered, raising a hand in an attempt to… calm her? Reassure her I meant no harm? I wasn’t sure myself. “Nenetl?” My consort showed no hint that she recognized me. Her canine eyes betrayed no hint of intelligence beyond bestial savagery. She barred her fangs at me as if to intimidate me. Did she identify me as the monster’s source in her current state? Or had her bestial Tonalli taken her over so completely that it treated everything as a threat? “Easy, Nenetl…” I whispered while crawling back. I prepared to use the Doll spell to defend myself if the worst came to be, though I had the feeling it wouldn’t help me much against a creature over three times my weight. “It’s me, Iztac. We played tumi together.” I would have loved to say that an evening spent playing board games had forged an unbreakable bond between Nenetl and me. It didn’t. She opened her jaw and attempted to bite my head off so fast that her maw reached my throat before I could react. By the time activating the Doll spell crossed my mind, I already felt the tip of her fangs on my skin. She could have ripped it out in a blink. Nenetl stopped before delivering the killing blow. I looked into her wide eyes, full of dread and fear. Her mouth remained wide open and frozen in place. Her extended hands would never reach my chest. She was floating in place, her feet a few inches above the ground, her body trapped midway through her attack as if the march of time had halted suddenly. An all-too familiar power had seized her utterly. A terrifying presence loomed behind me, the very air turning colder than winter’s cruelest nights. My breath turned to mist, and my heart stopped beating within my chest. “Good dog,” a dreadful, familiar voice whispered. I dared to look over my shoulder. Ocelocihuatl, the Jaguar Woman, smiled back at me. I had never seen her without her mask. Perhaps she had no time to put it on, or she no longer felt the need to wear a ceremonial disguise within the palace. Her dreadful beauty more than matched that of her sister, Yoloxochitl, albeit wilder and more savage. Her mane of hair was a paler shade of red than her eyes, almost orange, and topped by a golden diadem in the shape of a jaguar’s ears. Her skin-fitting robes were made of true spotted fur and blackened feathers, however. Occult symbols covered both her full cheeks and her strong, sleeveless arms, each of them pulsating with power. “Your prayers have been answered, Iztac Ce Ehecatl.” While the Nightlord showed none of Nenetl’s previous fury, she radiated a different kind of savagery. The sophisticated cruelty of a great cat toying with its prey, the viciousness of a mountain lion preparing to pounce without a sound. “You are safe now.” Being eaten by a wolf suddenly became halfway appealing. The Jaguar Woman waved her hand and threw Nenetl across the room. My transformed friend crashed through her kitchen wall and finished her course against the stone oven, which cracked under the pressure. I had to admit it was an impressive display of magic. The ease at which the Jaguar Woman’s version of the Doll spell—cloaked in the Veil to hide the strings—disarmed Nenetl and tossed her aside like a ragdoll reminded me of how Queen Mictecacihuatl caught me the first time we met. Either the Nightlord’s skill in magic matched that of a goddess, or my untrained eyes couldn’t tell the difference yet. I sincerely hoped for the latter. The possibility of a false goddess’s power rivaling that of a real one terrified me, especially since I would have to confront her in battle in less than a year. Had five hundred of those bloodthirsty rituals imbued the Nightlords with a sliver of divine magic? This only made it more imperative for me to strengthen my Teyolia with godly embers. I would stand no chance otherwise. How did she even sneak up on me? I thanked the gods below that I failed to activate my Doll spell in time, or else the Jaguar Woman would have caught me in the act. Can she jump out of shadows or phase through walls? “Stay down, dog,” the Jaguar Woman ordered without raising her voice. The beast who used to be Nenetl whined and crawled in submission, her snout against the ground, her eyes pleading for mercy. The Jaguar Woman allowed herself an arrogant smile that made me want to puke. “Good girl.” I spent the rest of the evening being interrogated. Nenetl was still trapped in the skin of a wolf when the red-eyed priests chained and dragged her away like a mad dog in need of a beating. I felt tremendously sorry for her. She had transformed trying to protect me from danger. “Worry not, Iztac Ce Ehecatl.” By now, I was convinced that the Jaguar Woman always called me by my full name as a way to demean me. To remind me that I was neither an emperor nor a ruler worthy of respect, but a mere man. “The first change is violent, but not permanent. My servants will beat the wolf out of her.” Her phrasing caused me to gulp. “Beat it?” The Jaguar Woman’s smile showcased her sharp, terrible fangs. “How do you think men tamed wolves into dogs?” I will see to it that this wolf bites your hand one day, oh cruel queen of the night. You will tame neither of us. If I had the power to turn back the march of time, I would have done my best to spare Nenetl whatever torment the priests had planned for her. But what was done was done. I would have to live with the guilt and consequences, which promised to be heavy. After the Jaguar Woman studied the tablet’s remains, I was brought to the Abode of Darkness below the palace to meet with the Nightlords. While the White Snake and the Bird of War manifested through the statues in their likeness, Yoloxochitl came in person to “support” me. “My poor child, you are safe…” Yoloxochitl hugged me the same way I hugged Necahual after she threatened her with rape. She stroked my hair and whispered kind words into my ear. “No one will harm you now. I swear it.” No one but you? “Worry not, Mother,” I replied while returning the hug. “I was unharmed.” I buried my head into Yoloxochitl’s black hair to hide my disgust. From the glare the Jaguar Woman sent us, I wasn’t the only one feeling that way. Either she found her sister’s display of affection humiliating, or she didn’t buy my poor boy’s act in the slightest. “I will decimate your guards for their incompetence, and our warlocks too,” Yoloxochitl swore angrily after letting me go. “They swore to us that the tablet presented no danger. No danger at all!” Sugey’s voice came out of her statue. “Our thralls have been negligent lately, but I would hear what happened from our emperor’s own mouth.” “Yes, of course.” Yoloxochitl put a hand on my shoulder. “Iztac, tell us everything.” “As you wish, Mother,” I replied, my heart pounding in my chest. Come on, Iztac, you’ve rehearsed this in your head many times. I proceeded to recount the evening’s events to the Nightlords. I did not lie, mostly because I feared they might sense the deceit in my voice. Instead, I simply omitted key details. I confessed how I had been considering waging war on the Sapa to obtain the required tribute—an admission which drew a laugh from the Bird of War’s statue—and gathered cultural artifacts as a way to understand their culture. “You felt you were being watched?” The Jaguar Woman squinted at me. “How?” “I… am not sure how to explain it,” I replied with a trembling hand. It wasn’t a lie. I still didn’t understand how the Sapa’s spying device managed to avoid detection until my Gaze spell identified its true nature. “I sensed an… an invisible pressure coming from the tablet, if that makes sense?” “Your Nahualli powers must have manifested,” Yoloxochitl said with a proud nod. “They let you cast away this web of deceit.” My heart skipped a beat. “Nahualli?” “A child blessed and cursed by the stars,” the Jaguar Woman explained calmly. Unlike her sister, her expression remained utterly unreadable. “Much like the consort I chose for you embodies the wolf, an owl sleeps within your soul.” “The owl?” I feigned surprise. Damn that witch, she knows. “Forgive me, but I struggle to understand.” “Your totem is the owl,” the Jaguar Woman answered with a hint of annoyance. A patient teacher, she was not. “A wise and knowledgeable spirit.” But one you don’t understand everything about, or else you would prevent me from sleeping. The true dead keep a Tlacatecolotl’s secrets. “We are getting off-track,” Sugey’s voice complained. “Carry on with your tale, Emperor Iztac.” I remained on edge from start to finish, though I wasn’t half as frightened as that time Yoloxochitl took me away to the park. If the Nightlords had learned my true nature, I would already be done for. Nenetl’s unexpected transformation had helped muddle already troubled waters and obscured the so-called goddesses’ sight. From time to time, I glanced at Yoloxochitl as if to seek her support, which she returned with warm smiles and small nods of encouragement. I did not need them, nor did they bring me any joy. But they helped sell the image of a cowed emperor who had learned whose approval he ought to seek. “A creature of smoke?” Sugey’s statue marked a short pause. “Our priests detected no such thing. They have grown weak and lax in their old age.” Iztacoatl’s voice surged from her own representation. “You are too harsh with them, sister. They did find the spying spell, did they not?” “A spying spell?” I repeated in genuine surprise. “W-Why? If you knew the tablet held a trap, why let it trigger?” The Jaguar Woman squinted at me with a cold gaze for daring to speak up uninvited. I immediately faked submission by lowering my head. “Our reasons are not for you to know, child,” she rasped. Sugey, the Bird of War, appeared to disagree. “We intended to turn the spell against the Sapa at an appropriate time. To feed them false information and deceive them.” “Who could have expected them to be foolish enough to hide an assassin within a slab of stone?” Iztacoatl’s statue let out a dark, chilling laugh. “How brazen. I did not know the Sapa’s lords could summon such a creature, let alone shield it from our gaze.” As I suspected, the Nightlords remained unsure of the Sapa Empire’s true capabilities. Their sorcerers zealously guarded their magical secrets. The assassination attempt, while unlikely, appeared plausible to the Nightlords. After all, they might possess similar spells hidden from the rest of the world. “Perhaps our current emperor is wise to seek battle with the Sapa Empire,” Sugey mused. “It has been too many decades since I enjoyed a true war. If these foreigners are brave enough to fight us back rather than cower, then they might prove a challenge.” “This bravery reeks of madness to me,” Iztacoatl replied. “I fail to see what the Sapa Empire hoped to accomplish by attacking our Godspeaker. Success wouldn’t have prevented a war. The mere attempt all but secured our hostility.” “I agree,” the Jaguar Woman said. Her suspicious gaze settled on me. “This fiasco seems a little too… convenient.” It took all my willpower not to show weakness. My mind remained strong, but I could already feel invisible, icy fingers touching my throat. Yoloxochitl scowled at the Jaguar Woman in displeasure. Apparently, she noticed too. “Convenient for whom, my sister?” “Therein lies the question.” The Jaguar Woman met my gaze, unblinking. “What are you hiding from us, Iztac Ce Ehecatl?” She is the most dangerous of them— the most cunning and perceptive. As I thought that, I kept trying to come up with a good distraction. “I…” I gulped as if afraid of speaking too much. “I am not sure I should bring this up…” “Speak,” the Jaguar Woman ordered. The invisible noose around my neck tightened a little further. Yoloxochitl’s scowl deepened, but she did not intervene. Some mother she was when confronted with resistance. “I…” I did not fake the terror in my voice. If I failed to convince the Nightlords now, I would not see the light of day again. “I remember the night Mother Yoloxochitl took me under her wing. She… sensed an evil spirit lurking in the shadows.” “My dear Iztac speaks the truth.” Yoloxochitl nodded to herself. “I smelled a foul invader a few nights ago.” “Ah yes, I remember you mentioned an incident the night you claimed that peasant,” the White Snake said. That the Nightlords considered forcing a child to kill her own father a mere “incident” filled me with disdain. “The Sapa ambassadors had already delivered the tablet to the palace at that point.” “You believe that could have been the same creature?” Sugey pondered out loud. I nodded slowly. “If I may be so bold… Maybe I was not the creature’s target.” The Jaguar Woman scoffed in disdain. “You insinuate this monster intended to target us?” One day, it will. “In my village, we are taught that dogs hunt by smell,” I recounted, trying to weave half-truths into a plausible explanation. “Sometimes, they mistake a beast for another because they trust their nose over their own eyes. I… I dare not presume anything, but… I was present with Mother Yoloxochitl when the spirit first appeared.” Yoloxochitl’s eyes burned with anger. “This trap was set for me, but the beast could not tell us apart.” The Jaguar Woman remained unconvinced. “Why not send the tablet as a gift to us then, instead of our prophet?” “To avoid suspicion?” Iztacoatl suggested. “The strings would have been too obvious otherwise.” Sugey grumbled in frustration. “Does it matter why the snake bit?” she asked. “No. What matters is that it did.” “There must be consequences for this brazen attack, my sisters,” Yoloxochilt declared. “A reckoning.” “I have read Chikal’s plans,” Sugey said with a hint of bloodthirst. “They appear credible to me. The Sapa Empire left its flank exposed to us.” I noted that the Nightlords appeared to keep an eye on their chosen consorts’ activities and observed them bicker among themselves. As my predecessors guessed, Sugey was a warmonger. As befitting her title of the Bird of War, the opportunity of fighting a foe daring enough to challenge their puppet emperor appealed to her. Meanwhile, Yoloxochitl’s madness and paranoia served me well. She truly believed my tale that an invisible enemy sought to harm her through me, her prized possession, and as usual she intended to react to this offense with overwhelming violence. The two other Nigthlords would prove harder to convince. “We cannot let this go unpunished, that is true,” Iztacoatl replied. “However, I am not too fond of sustained wars. The Sapa Empire will not fall in a year, and we have other means to retaliate. Let us simply execute their ambassadors and call it a night.” “The moment to conquer the Sapa Empire has not come yet,” the Jaguar Woman added. “Victory will neither be quick nor certain.” I was about to open my mouth and argue my case when Yoloxochitl beat me to it. “Not if we use the weapon, sisters.” A terrible silence followed. The Jaguar Woman’s icy grip on my throat lessened to almost nothing as she turned her attention to her sister. The otherworldly presence of the White Snake and the Bird of War weakened, and their connection to their statues was briefly disrupted. I took it as an ill-omen. Goddesses did not fall speechless easily, even fake ones. “It is complete,” Yoloxochitl stated with confidence. “We only need to test it.” “That will spoil the food,” Iztacoatl warned. Was that uneasiness I detected in her tone? The “weapon”? I frowned. What weapon could possibly unsettle a Nightlord? Did my predecessors fail to inform me? The Jaguar Woman glanced at me with a baleful glare. The same one she sent me on the night of my coronation before strangling me into unconsciousness. She was considering doing the same here and now, only holding back because it was already too late to shut her sister up. I shouldn’t be hearing this. The cattle shouldn’t learn the means of its demise. “Not all of it,” Yoloxochitl replied before glancing at Sugey. “It shall cull the weak and spare the strong. You will still have your war, my sister. Short and sweet.” Sugey marked a short pause before referring to her elder sister. “What do you say, Ocelocihuatl?” The Jaguar Woman, first among equals, pondered her answer. I could tell I had failed to convince her. She remained unconvinced by my tale. However, the truth mattered little to someone who had built an empire on lies. Justice mattered less than appearance and opportunity. When she released her grip on my throat, I knew my foes had chosen the path of greed. “Rejoice, Iztac Ce Ehacatl. The gods assent to your request.” The Jaguar Woman smiled at me. “The Sapa Empire will learn fear.” I returned her smile with one of my own. The true battle had begun. part0022. 17CONSEQUENCES “The weapon?” I nodded before the Parliament of Skulls. Once the Nightlords let me go, I immediately went to report to my predecessors. “Iztacoatl mentioned it would spoil the ‘food,’” I said, my lips twisting in disdain. “Whatever that means.” My words gave even the dead pause. “Of all the Nightlords, Iztacoatl is the cruelest,” the skulls whispered. “If she protested against the use of this weapon, then its cost must be grim.” Having witnessed Yoloxochitl eat her own men and the Jaguar Woman nearly strangle me to death, I grimly pondered how the White Snake could somehow be worse. “Have you no knowledge of what such a weapon might be, my predecessors?” The emperors’ skulls wriggled on their pillar. If they still had necks, they would probably have shaken their heads. “The Nightlords managed to keep certain secrets from us, such as this weapon. However, we can make conjectures. Are you certain Yoloxochitl developed it?” “I believe so,” I confirmed. “Yoloxochitl is a middling sorceress when compared to her more accomplished sisters, so we doubt it is a spell. No spear or bow, however refined, would impress her sisters.” “So we can rule out improved equipment.” I crossed my arms, trying to remember any key detail that might help us uncover the truth. “They said the weapon. Singular.” “If it risks ruining the Nightlords’ blood supply, then it must be a poison of some sort,” the Parliament said. “Yoloxochitl does have a certain gift for gardening.” A chill traveled down my spine. I had seen firsthand what kind of plants she catered to. “Could it be a flower from her garden?” I suggested. “Odious seeds that will bloom at night to devour the living?” “Mayhaps,” my predecessors replied. “You must discover the truth. If the Nightlords are confident this weapon will turn the coming campaign to their advantage, it must be destroyed as soon as possible.” How ironic. I had sparked a war with a foreign empire and now plotted how to help them win as efficiently as possible. “Cultivate your relationship with the Flower of the Heart,” my predecessors suggested. “This remains your best option to uncover the truth so far.” Unfortunately, they were right. I had no desire to spend any more time in Yoloxochitl’s twisted company than was necessary, but the fate of the war would depend on it. The closer we grow, the easier the kill. She can’t do worse than what I have already seen. I kept telling myself that, and the Nightlords kept proving me wrong. “That matter aside, we are very pleased with your progress, our successor.” The Parliament’s eyes lit up all at once, their radiance briefly strong enough to cast away the Reliquary’s shadows. For a moment, it seemed as if dawn itself threatened to rise from the darkness. “Your plan, however risky, shall herald a new war fraught with opportunities.” “It cost Nenetl dearly,” I replied, my fists tightening. I never meant to involve her. Not this way. “It is unfortunate that your consort awakened her totem under these circumstances,” the skulls lamented, though they showed little compassion for Nenetl herself. “We had hoped to cultivate her gifts in secret. Still, the wolf is a strong totem and we will not let the Jaguar Woman shackle it. We can make use of her.” I felt a little ashamed at asking, “How so?” “The wolf is a totem of kinship and draws power from the moon,” my predecessors explained. “With enough training, your consort will learn how to control her transformation and gain enough strength to rival the lesser Nightkin. It will be an asset in battle.” “Why would the Nightlords let her transform?” My jaw clenched on its own. “The Jaguar Woman made her intention to ‘tame’ Nenetl all too clear.” “One can shackle the wild, but never truly conquer it.” The skulls let out a cold, sinister chuckle. “When a Nahualli awakens their bestial form in the Jaguar Woman’s care, she always proceeds the same way—she marks them with spells that let her both trigger the transformation at will or punish it with terrible pain. Many Nahualli among us suffered from this treatment.” I thanked fate for blessing me with a subtler totem, or it would have happened to me too. “Why does the Jaguar Woman do that?” I asked. “She selected Nenetl as a consort because she was a Nahualli, from what I gathered, so she must gain some benefit out of it.” “She does,” the Parliament confirmed. “The Jaguar Woman has learned how to drain magic as well as blood. She will feed on Nenetl’s power, diminishing your consort’s potential and strengthening her sorcery.” The witch waited for Nahualli’s powers to mature the way a farmer waited for a vegetable to grow full before the harvest. Disgusting. “We have developed countermeasures over previous cycles,” the previous emperors reassured me, though their solution proved far more sinister than I would have liked. “Subtle alterations to the Jaguar Woman’s design will let you subtly usurp control over her bindings. You will gain equal power over young Nenetl’s transformation.” “This… This is not what I wish for.” I gulped. “Is there no way to simply break the spells controlling Nenetl and let her run free?” “Not without alerting the Jaguar Woman.” A thousand eyes gazed at me in silence. “What concerns you, our successor?” “You suggest that I further tighten Nenelt’s leash,” I replied with a sigh of exhaustion. “I would rather free her and have her join us out of her own free will.” The Parliament of Skulls meditated on my words for a few seconds before answering. “Perhaps she will in time,” they reassured me. “But so long as the Jaguar Woman remains in this world, your consort’s fate shall remain out of her own hands. Any freedom you offer will be an illusion, a mirage. To break her mistress’ shackles, you must use all the means at your disposal.” “I understand necessity is law, but…” I struggled to explain why treating Nenetl this way bothered me. How was exploiting a loophole in the Jaguar Woman’s spells less righteous than starting a war that would kill thousands? “Nenetl…” She was like me. A Nahualli that was rejected for her appearance and then exploited by others for their personal gain. I kept seeing myself in Guatemoc’s place as he watched me tend to the fields. “She is like clay, soft and weak and easy to twist,” the Yaotzin had warned me about Nenetl once. “She will become either your puppet or someone else’s, bound by love’s cruel strings.” “I would be treating her the same way I was, as a tool.” That was what troubled me the most. “What would that make me, my predecessors?” “What you wish to become,” the Parliament replied without hesitation. My guilt and remorse washed over them like water on an ancient stone. “There is no good or evil in this world, Iztac Ce Ehecatl. Only that which we believe in. The end matters as much as the means, our successor. The Nightlords will exploit your consort for their own profit, while you shall make use of her talents so she can one day earn her freedom.” That only sounded like justification to me. The same kind of prayers my citizens had when they saw their kin led to the altar; empty promises that all would be right in the end, that the world was a cruel place, and that there were no other ways. “Let us ask you a question, our successor.” I felt the weight of centuries worth of judgment on my shoulders. “If young Nenetl had not been your reflection… if you did not learn to know this girl in all her imperfections… if she had been a stranger you met on the road… would you hesitate as you do now?” My jaw tightened. I dearly wanted to say yes, that I would treat a stranger the same way I would care for a friend… but it would have been an empty lie. I had started a war that would leave thousands dead or suffering in vampire bellies. “You would not.” The previous emperors sounded neither surprised nor condemning. Instead, they dispensed advice. “Listen well, Iztac. Those who let their feelings cloud their judgment will always stumble before they can reach their goal. Attachments can be both the roots that fuel a soul’s strength and the ropes that bind it to suffering.” I thought back to Eztli, to whom I clung in spite of what she had become, in the hope I could see her return to normalcy. “Do you suggest I let go of everything?” “Cherish the bonds you have formed when they grant your strength,” my predecessors said, “but do not let them blind you to the truth, or distract you from your duty. Thousands of Nenetls will perish by the time we bring down Yohuachanca, and not all casualties will be strangers you do not care for. This is a fact you must accept.” I once again thought back to what happened with Nenetl. I did not wish to involve her in this manner, but when she tried to rescue me… I would have sicced my Veiled phantom on her to sell my lie. I would have felt guilty, but I would have done it nonetheless. She was trying to protect me, and I had been ready to harm her anyway. I hadn’t considered her feelings. I took the easy path without thinking of other ones. No matter what my predecessors say, I shouldn’t reward kindness with cruelty. “I refuse to become the very evil I fight against,” I said resolutely. “I will do what I must to destroy the Nightlords, but… there has to be another solution we haven’t considered yet. Perhaps the Land of the Dead Suns holds spells that can let me free Nenetl without replacing her master with another.” “Mayhaps,” the Parliament conceded cautiously. “It might cost you time and effort.” “I will bear that burden,” I stated resolutely. “I will do what is necessary, not what is convenient.” “Your principles do you credit, our successor,” the Parliament whispered back, a little more kindly. “Though we wonder how long you can afford to stay true to them.” “As long as I can.” I sighed and moved on, though I promised myself I would contact the Yaotzin and Sigrun to check on Nenetl. “What happens next? I was told the New Fire Ceremony would take place over the next five days. Will it be canceled?” “No,” the Parliament replied succinctly. “For the foreseeable future, the Nightlords will not let word of this event reach the outside world. The New Fire Ceremony will happen as scheduled, both for the sake of its religious significance and to delay foreign spy reports. The Sapa delegation will certainly be put under house arrest and interrogated within a few days’ time.” I could already guess what form this interrogation would take. The red-eyed priests understood perfectly how to arouse pain in the human body. After all, they carved them open for a living. “The ambassadors will claim their innocence in the tablet affair, probably truthfully,” the Parliament explained to me. “We doubt their superior informed them of the Chaskarumi’s properties. The Nightlords will not care. They will be kept as hostages and then publicly sacrificed once their armies start marching.” My phantom did not kill any ambassador but I had condemned them to death all the same. “In the meantime, a few things will happen.” My predecessors’ eyes lit up all at once. “Security around the palace will tighten. More guards will keep an eye on you, and the Nightlords’ servants shall survey magical activity more closely.” “I shall not use magic again within the palace’s confines,” I reassured them. With Tlacaelel dead, I didn’t have any obvious target to turn my talons on anyway. I was content with training in the Underworld for now. “The time for the hunt shall come later, in the spring.” The light in the skull’s empty eyes dimmed a little. “As emperor, you will be expected to bring luck to soldiers by joining them on the frontlines. Another Nightlord shall escort you.” I guessed easily enough. “Sugey,” I said. “She relished the thought of fighting the Sapa herself.” “The Bird of War bears her name well.” The Parliament let out a rattle that could pass for a snort of contempt. “Of the four sisters, she craves the blood of warriors over all others. She is proud of her strength and far too reckless. She will be the easiest to lure into a trap.” Indeed. My predecessor, Nochtli, proceeded the same way. His trap failed since he relied on warriors rather than warlocks, but where strength failed, my magic might succeed. “I may not need to sully my hands personally,” I whispered. “There might be warlocks among the Sapa capable of destroying her under the proper conditions.” “Mayhaps,” my predecessors replied, albeit cautiously. “We stand by our words. When it comes to fighting the Nightkin and Nightlords, you can only rely on your own sorcery.” “Of course.” Relying on others would be a terrible mistake. Still, perhaps the Sapa could help soften Sugey up for the kill. “As your advisor in matters of war, your consort Chikal shall also rise in prominence. We suggest you spend the next few weeks earning her allegiance and preparing the campaign. We shall advise you on how to approach generals who might come to support your cause.” I nodded in agreement. Chikal was the consort I had spent the least time with, and she remained an enigma to me in many ways. This would give me the opportunity to test the waters with her. At the same time, I would continue to cultivate a spy network from within the palace and convince Yoloxochitl to tell me more about her weapon. By night, I would spend time practicing my spells and preparing for the journey to Tlalocan. My schedule for the next few weeks appeared clear enough to me. “Is there anything special about the New Fire Ceremony?” I asked my predecessors. “Or is it all lies and theatrics?” “If there is a cosmic significance behind the ceremony, we could never divine one. However, we did not possess a divine Teyolia either. Your Gaze spell might reveal to you secrets hidden from us.” The Parliament’s eyes turned to the Reliquary’s threshold, beyond which night had long fallen. “You best rest now, Iztac. Your escort will start growing suspicious otherwise.” Wise. A squad’s worth of guards anxiously awaited my return. Considering what Yoloxochitl had done to a last set and how their predecessors perished by my talons, they might lose their nerve and break into the Reliquary to check in on me. However, one last question burned on my lips. “I have a final query, my predecessors,” I said, choosing my words carefully. “One that has little to do with our current struggle, but that will not leave my mind.” “Ask away.” I raised my head until my eyes locked with a thousand more. “What happened to your sons?” An unsettling silence fell upon the Reliquary. Now that was unusual. Terribly unusual. I had never seen the emperors’ skulls left speechless by anything. Surprised, yes. But never speechless. Their silence spoke volumes too. If the Parliament of Skulls had no answer to my query, they would have said as much. Their glimmering ghostlights flared in and out of existence in a strange dance. The eyes of a dozen skulls lit up brightly for an instant, only for others to eclipse them a moment later. They’re holding a debate. Individual souls exchanged thoughts with the rest of the collective in an attempt to find a common position. What secret could be terrifying enough to disrupt their assembly? After what felt like long, agonizing minutes, the Parliament finally answered my query. Their previously unified whispers now reverberated in discordant tones. “We apologize, our successor, for we cannot reach a consensus.” “You cannot?” I blinked in astonishment. That was unheard of. “Why?” “A third of us believe you deserve to know the truth,” the dead emperors answered. “Another third argues that you are not ready to hear it yet. And the last third thinks you are better off not learning this truth at all.” “Trust not the skulls,” the Yaotzin had warned me. “They keep secrets from you.” “I am not ready?” My fists tightened in anger. “Do you mistake me for a child, unable to hear an adult’s truths? Do you not trust me?” Over six hundred skulls stared at me as one. “It is not that we do not trust you, Iztac Ce Ehecalt. In our current state, we have no choice but to put all of our hopes in you. However…” The shadows around me lengthened and the ghostlights dimmed. The night had invaded the Reliquary, trapping me in cold, baleful blackness. “There exists a darkness so deep that only the blackest hearts can witness it unflinchingly,” the skulls whispered ominously. “A night that will swallow even the star burning in your chest.” My blood froze when I realized that my predecessors would not tell me the truth not out of distrust but out of concern. The Yaotzin wouldn’t tell me either. Not without paying a high price. Since the winds of chaos traded in suffering and cruelty, the implications appeared grimmer and grimmer the more I considered them. “If you won’t tell me, then it means the truth is worse than anything I can imagine.” I guessed, my voice growing lower. “A cruelty so awful to behold, you fear that it will break my spirit.” The Parliament’s cold silence only confirmed my suspicions. “Listen well, Iztac Ce Ehecatl.” My spine stiffened, and I held my breath. “There is a secret maze beneath the Blood Pyramid,” the skulls whispered. “A place forbidden to all but the Nightkin and their progenitors. Neither priests nor emperors are allowed within these chambers. Though a few among us managed to discover the truth through our wits and research, only a handful ventured into these depths to witness the truth with their own eyes. It is there you will find the answers you seek…” My heart pounded so hard that it hurt. “And if you dare look at the truth,” the dead whispered, their words half a warning and half a curse. “You will never forget it.” I did not make a sound. Not a single murmur. “Go to sleep now, child,” said the emperors. “We pray that you might dream of lighter things.” I left the Reliquary without a word. I did not find sleep easily. My room was colder and darker than before. Neither fur nor sheets offered me comfort. Red eyes watched me in the dead of night, observing my chest rise and fall with my breathing. My chambers once gave me an illusion of privacy. Though I knew of spies in the walls, I had been allowed to sleep without servants or guards within the chambers. Not tonight. Not after a false demon attempted to take my life. Six guards were posted in each corner of my room on Yoloxochitl’s orders, zealously protecting me from an enemy that did not exist. I was surrounded, yet so alone. I could not call for help either. Summoning Eztli might raise suspicion, especially since I asked her to reduce the number of spies in the secret passages if she could. The thought of asking for Ingrid crossed my mind. I knew we only used each other, but I wouldn't have minded a pair of warm hands holding me right now to cradle me into a gentle sleep. A glance at the guards in my room killed the idea in its crib. I did not want my captors to stand in a corner and watch us make love or even cuddle. It would ruin any comfort I could hope to find in this cursed palace. I tried to close my eyes and ignore those watching me. I tried to think of Nenetl, suffering in the dungeons below, and the thousands who would soon die because of me. Instead, my predecessors’ words haunted me. You will never forget. In the end, I took the sleeping draught Necahual had prepared for me. Its sweetness summoned a fog that overtook my mind, covering my dark thoughts with a daze of nothingness. The brief moment of oblivion that preceded my fall into the Land of the Dead Suns came as a relief. I awoke in the dead plaza, among the bones. I found Xolotl waiting for me, sitting on a bed of ashes. I extended my arm and waited for him to chew it. And waited. And waited some more. “You are not tasting me tonight?” I asked Xolotl after a while, a bit confused. Had the god grown sick of chewing my bones? Xolotl smelled my tender arm and then dramatically snubbed it by turning his head away. What a show-off. “You do not deserve me,” he said, as if biting my arm was somehow an honor. “You mean, deceptive child.” That was new and unexpected. I immediately guessed the probable cause. “Is this about Huehuecoyotl?” I asked with a groan. “What has he done in my absence?” “Who cares about that old coyote?” Xolotl glared at me. “I am deeply upset with you, Iztac. How dare you play with my heart after all I’ve done for you? Have I not been kind and helpful?” “Helpful, yes; kind is debatable,” I replied with a scowl. Was he mocking me? I thought it might be a prank of some kind or an attempt to extort another favor from me, but he seemed genuinely annoyed. “Will you tell me what this is all about? I must practice my spellcasting and the nights are short.” “Yes, yes, play the fool.” Xolotl put a leg over another, his eyes glaring at me filled with judgment. “You have lied to me, Iztac. You did not tell me your father was killed by a vampire.” Of all the things the god could have said to me, I would have never guessed that. I stared at Xolotl as my mind struggled to make sense of his words, my eyes looking for any hint of a joke. I didn’t find any. He was entirely serious. “I think I would know if that were the case,” I replied with heavy sarcasm. “No Nightkin touched my father.” “Then how did he die?” Xolotl asked. “The drought killed him.” The answer came quickly, the details a little slower. “We were starved for food and fresh water, and my father… my father gave me everything he could scrounge up. The heat and thirst…” It still hurt to remember these days, even after so many years. “They became too much for him.” I expected Xolotl to show indifference, as he usually did. To my surprise, his canine features eased up a little instead. “You are telling the truth.” “Of course I am,” I snapped back. I did not like to remember Father’s death, or what followed. “Is it about my request?” Xolotl nodded slowly. “I could not find him.” As I feared. “He must be lost outside the city,” I said. “My father died over four years ago, but the souls I have rescued were trapped for deca⁠—” “No, Iztac, you do not understand.” Xolotl snorted, his pride wounded. “I am the god of guides. If I want to find a lost soul or a forgotten treasure, I always succeed. It is my nature, my cosmos-mandated job. I could not find your father’s soul anywhere.” I almost mocked Xolotl for his lack of work ethic, only for his words to hit me like a wave. A god couldn’t find my father’s soul. “Maybe you missed him,” I tried to argue, hoping Xolotl had simply made a mistake. “I have visited every Itzili who has ever existed,” Xolotl explained in annoyance. “After many dead ends, I even tracked down your paternal grandparents for answers.” “My grandparents?” It suddenly occurred to me that yes, I had those. They had perished before my birth, so I never knew them. In fact, I didn’t remember Father ever mentioning them. “They’re in Mictlan?” “Yes, and guess what? They are still waiting for their son to arrive.” Xolotl sighed and started licking his paw in frustration. “Oh, by the way, they were pretty happy to learn that they had a grandson. You should go pay them a visit. They seemed kind enough.” “I…” I admit the idea had never crossed my mind. Not only were they strangers to me, but I was a Nahualli. A curse on their son’s household. They would likely blame me for their son’s disappearance over welcoming me into their midst. “I do not have time for it. Maybe next year.” If I survived that long. “Suit yourself,” Xolotl replied before squinting at me. “Are you certain your father did not fake his death?” I glared at Xolotl for his lack of tact. “I buried him myself.” Instead of backing down, the god foolishly dug himself deeper. “Are you sure it wasn’t a secret twin?” he dared to ask me. “Those things happen more often than you thi⁠—” “I’m sure.” This shouldn’t be happening. “My father died years ago! He should be here, in the Underworld, in Mictlan⁠—” Wait a second. Xolotl warned me that he could only roam the Land of the Dead Suns’ first layer. He could not access the depths below, hence his request that I deliver a message to his brother, Quetzalcoatl. And my mother had left Mictlan in disgrace with a bounty of stolen souls. Could my father have been one of them? It would explain it. “Ah, I see.” Xolotl seemed to have guessed at what gnawed at me. “You think the spirit thief absconded with his soul to Tlalocan.” My parents must have reunited in the Underworld, and when Mother fled Mictlan, Father followed her. His love for her remained intact in spite of her disappearance. I hoped the feeling was mutual. I must find them. I had already decided to track down my mother, and knowing my father was with her only cemented my choice. Rumors said Mother built a lair in a place called Xilbaba. I need to find more information. “Well, in that case, I cannot fulfill the terms of our bargain,” Xolotl confessed with a grunt. “Curses, I wasted a full day on a pointless errand.” I seized my chance. “I am still willing to deliver a message to your brother,” I reassured Xolotl. “If you cannot fulfill your end of our bargain, I have an alternative favor in mind.” “Are you trying to short-change a god?” Xolotl bolted to his feet in outrage. “I knew Huehuecoyolt would be a terrible influence on you!” “Too late,” I mused. “Don’t worry, my idea shouldn’t take too much effort for a skilled guide such as you. All I need is advice.” “Advice?” Xolotl’s ears perked up in interest. “Ah, you should have said so sooner. Of course, humble Xolotl will dispense his wisdom if you ask nicely.” “I request knowledge, not wisdom.” I doubted he had much of the second to give anyway. “I will venture into Tlalocan soon to carry on with my quest. I need information on the dangers that await me there and how to survive them.” “That place is forbidden to me, remember?” Xolotl grumbled. “I cannot advise you on how to survive a place I cannot enter.” “But rumors about the place managed to find their way to Mictlan,” I pointed out. The boatsman had had at least a vague understanding of how Tlaloc claimed souls, and the Market of Years abounded with esoteric relics of bygone ages. “All that is lost and forgotten eventually makes its way to Mictlan. Surely that must include records of Tlalocan.” Xolotl considered my words for a moment and found merit in my proposal. “I could scavenge the wastes outside these walls for a scroll or a map of Tlalocan, true…” “I would be thankful for anything useful,” I said, insisting on the last part. “And if I bring you the information you seek, will you swear to fulfill my request in turn?” Xolotl asked. I nodded in confirmation, much to his delight. “Very well. I hope this won’t be another fool’s errand, but if I find anything, I will return to you with haste.” I would pray for his success, but since Xolotl was already a god, it would have been silly. Instead, I wished him good luck as he left. This time, he was happy enough to chew my arm on his way out. I wondered how long it would take for him to return. If Xolotl’s powers truly allowed him to find anything he wanted, perhaps he would come back before the night’s end. Wait, if he truly can find anything… then it meant Chipahua and Ueman spent decades lost in the mist purely because the god had been too lazy to search for them. The lives and happiness of us mortals mean little to gods. I bitterly pondered while sitting among the bones. True or false, it makes no difference. Neglect is the best we can hope for. I wove myself in a cloak of illusions. Huehuecoyotl had made it clear that he did not want to see me again after teaching me his secrets, so I would need to practice on my own. I immediately sensed an invisible presence weighted on my Veil spell. I had summoned a simple illusion that turned my black feathers white. A simple workout before I started practicing more intense exercises. The plaza was empty and Xolotl was long gone, yet a foreign gaze pressed against my spell. However, what alerted me was the sense of familiarity that pervaded this particular presence. I recognized it immediately. After all, I had felt it not too long ago. I activated my Gaze spell and looked around. The weight pressing on my illusion vanished the moment sunlight started pouring out of my eyes. I detected no hidden ghost, no assassin waiting to ambush me from the shadows. Yet I knew I hadn’t dreamed it. Whatever Sapa sorcerer spied on me through the Chaskarumi tablet had eyes in the Underworld. part0023. 18FROM THE SKIN Invisible eyes watched me all night long. I searched every corner of the ashen plaza. I sought shelter in anonymity by hiding among the thousand dead corpses that walked through the Market of Years. I put on a dozen disguises and slithered among towers of skulls. All these efforts failed to deter my stalker nonetheless. “I seek you no harm!” I shouted into empty space while sensing the spy’s eyes on me. “I wish to parlay! We share a common foe!” No voice answered my words. Either the Sapa spy couldn’t answer me, or they didn’t believe me in the slightest. I knew which of these two options was more likely. After three attempts at communication, I gave up for now and focused on escaping my pursuer. They clearly would only listen to my pleas if forced to. I felt their invisible stare following me everywhere, only fleeing when I activated my Gaze spell. These moments offered me little respite, for my elusive stalker returned the moment sunlight stopped pouring out of my eyes. Only when I hid in the secret bone tunnels leading to the threshold of Tlalocan did I escape their attention. Whoever they are, they need an open sky to stalk me. I thought while standing in the shade of a tunnel’s threshold under a skull mound. I took a step into the dead sun’s light and immediately sensed this familiar spying spell brush against my Veil. I immediately returned to the shadows to escape it. And they do not relent. I would have expected an ambush of some kind by now, but Mictecacihuatl had laid down the laws of her realm on my first night in Mictlan. To bring violence into the city’s walls meant inviting her and her husband’s wrath. I guessed even a Sapa sorcerer would rather avoid angering a pair of gods. Could my pursuer be a Tlacatecolotl? It would make the most sense. It would be foolish to expect my mother and I to be the only owl-spirits in the world. I felt stupid not to have considered that one of them might work for the Sapa. A Tlacatecolotl could easily spy on me from atop a bone tower under the cover of a Veil and retreat back to the shadows whenever my light threatened to expose them. Still, their ability to track me gave me pause. I had stepped outside a different exit than the one I used to enter the tunnels; yet the watcher detected me the moment I stepped out of hiding. Either they happened to look at this mound at the exact moment I threatened to walk into the light, which was unlikely, or they used a spell whose inner workings escaped me. I need to take them by surprise. I ventured back into the tunnels. Search for an elevated point and corner them. Then we can hold a proper conversation. I crawled back into the dark, under a roof of bones and between walls of calcified ribs. I walked past half-sleeping dead undergoing the early processes of their long sleep. Some had already started fusing with the city, their legs merging with the ground like trees spreading their roots. The peaceful silence almost made me want to join them, to take a brief, serene rest from the chaos my life had become. Many would join the cohort of the dead in the coming months, though it would take years for most of my victims to make their way to Mictlan. I wondered if Tlacaelel was out there, walking the rainy wastes on his way to this shelter, pondering what brought him down. Perhaps I should look for his soul to kill him again. I briefly mused before banishing such a fantasy out of my mind. While the likes of Tlacaelel hardly deserved a peaceful rest, the grueling journey to Mictlan would torment him enough. I hardly had the time to pursue this grudge for now. My predecessors might have a point. Some attachments can become ropes binding us to suffering. I hardly understood the layout of Mictlan’s tunnels, but they seemed navigable enough. I wondered if Mictlantecuhtli watched over me from afar, opening paths and closing others to ease my journey. I doubted it. The ancient deity seemed likely to have forgotten me already. After a long walk, I reached another exit. I carefully stuck to the shadows without exposing a single feather of mine to the dim sunlight of Chalchiuhtlicue’s sun. The tunnel had led me to the shadow of a great bone tower near the city’s outer wall. No invisible eyes weighed on my Veil spell for now. Since my stalker hadn’t located me yet, I activated my Gaze spell and looked at the sky. The sunlight pouring out of me let me discover invisible details my regular eyes had missed—the intricate web of pulsating strings linking the corpses making up the towers of Mictlan; the subtle tapestry of bone walls rearranging themselves to adapt to the falling rain; the slow, subtle tremors spreading through the chalky ground beneath my feet. The dead might make up this city, but Mictlan felt alive to me the same way a tree was. Mictlantecuhtli’s realm spread its roots and expanded its branches across the centuries, gently welcoming more and more souls into its sheltering embrace. As fascinating as the sight was, my eyes focused on the cloudy skies above the ancient city. I searched for a bird, an owl, or an invisible Nahualli scouring the heavens in search of prey. Instead, I saw a strange object floating above the bone tower—an ornate mask topping a semi-circular blade. Everything was dulled and grayed in the Underworld, but the precious gold making up this strange totem reflected the dim sunlight well enough. The mask was in the shape of a gilded skull with emerald eyes and gemstone teeth, watching the city below with unparalleled focus. I immediately recognized the object. A tumi. A skull-sized tumi rather than one I could crush within the palm of my hand, but a tumi nonetheless. How unexpected. I was utterly puzzled by this turn of events. Is this a Nahualli form of some kind? No… It looks like a mere mask of gold instead of a shapeshifter. It doesn’t seem to sense my Gaze spell either. Come to think of it, the Sapa sorcerer hadn’t canceled their spying spell in the waking world when I uncovered their tablet’s secret. Neither did I hear of magic that could observe others from afar. Even the Yaotzin offered only whispers of past trauma and betrayal rather than a glimpse of the present. Could the sorcerer be a tumi? I observed the mask carefully. It floated aimlessly above the city, its glowing eyes casting a faint light over it. I would have bet a fortune in cacao beans that it could track down anyone stepping into its radius. It did not move an inch. It simply floated in place, waiting for me to step back into sight. Let’s see if it can defend itself. I cast the Doll spell and summoned a wispy, clawed string from my finger. I had never tested this power’s full range before, but now was as good a time as any. The length of a bone tower separated me from my target. As expected, the longer the string of my power unraveled, the greater the strain on my Tonalli. I stretched my shadow into a thin line of power that grew thinner and thinner with each new step. I had to wrap it inside a veil of illusions to keep it hidden from sight. The tumi detected my string nonetheless. Its emerald eyes snapped in my direction the moment my Doll spell expanded out of the shadows and into the mask’s light. I sent my string forward like a fisherman with his hook in a swift attempt to capture my prey. I caught only air. The tumi became translucent in an instant before dissipating into nothingness. The mask had vanished like my own illusions. It’s not really there. When I realized that, I retracted my string. It was a projection. A shadow on a wall. How odd that it can detect the Doll spell even when under a Veil but not my Gaze spell. I quickly guessed the reason why. The Doll and Veil spells both relied on my Tonalli, my animal spirit, while the Gaze called upon my Teyolia, my heart-fire. The Sapa sorcerer’s magic could not detect the latter. Interesting. I patiently waited for the tumi to reappear for many minutes, all in vain. I had either spooked the spirit away for the night or they were lying in wait somewhere else. “You have made a dangerous enemy, Iztac.” I looked up at the bone tower. A familiar figure descended from the sky and gracefully landed in the shade near me. It was the first time I saw Queen Mictecacihuatl with my Gaze spell active. The Lady of the Underworld had been a terrifying figure, even when cloaked in illusions. My eyes let me perceive the true weight of her station. Her flowing robes carried a storm of dust as old as time. Her flayed flesh was a mask, a veneer of life on fossilized bones carved with occult symbols. Her beautiful ebony tresses had taken on the color of ashes, and the marigolds she carried on her person wilted at once. Only her shining Teyolia remained vibrant and lively. “Yes.” The goddess let out a low chuckle. “I am old.” In spite of her light tone, her words carried great weight. She had been the first woman to ever die. A daughter of the first humanity, who had witnessed five dawns and endured through the ages. It amazed me that such an unfathomably ancient being could prove to be so down to earth and amiable toward a lowly mortal such as me. “Queen Mictecacihualt.” I bowed before the goddess and canceled my Gaze spell out of respect. “My most sincere apologies. I didn't mean to offend you.” “How so?” Without my sunlight to expose her true self, the goddess regained a more familiar shape—a regal queen wrapped in flayed skin, lavish robes, and blooming marigolds. “I wear a Veil of my own to ease my subjects’ minds. Between you and me, I would rather appear as a living woman, but I have found that reminders of their lost lives fill the dead with sorrow.” A Veil? Was the Gaze so powerful that it could pierce through a goddess’s illusions? Though I doubted she put too much effort into it, I still took pride in my magic’s potency. “I didn’t intend to carry grudges into your realm, oh goddess.” “So long as none of you break my husband’s laws, this matter is none of my concern,” Mictecacihualt replied calmly, her gaze turning to the empty spot the tumi used to occupy. “It does irk me to have a delinquent soul so brazenly intrude on Mictlan. If they so wish to linger among the living, they should have the courtesy not to disturb the dead.” “A delinquent soul?” I asked, trying to make sense out of the goddess’s words. “That sorcerer was no Nahualli?” “No, they are not,” the queen replied. “No more at least. I would wager that they number among the Mallquis.” “The Mallquis?” I repeated. “Forgive me, Your Grace, but the term is unknown to me.” “I would expect as much. Those sad souls are few and far between.” The goddess turned to face me and dispensed her wisdom. Her hands joined together, her voice deep and soothing. “Much as I dream of my mortal life, Iztac, some dead refuse to pass on. Where we see the long sleep as a peaceful rest, they see their own annihilation. Or perhaps they believe the living cannot survive without their wisdom and guidance. There exist spells that allow dead sorcerers to linger in the waking world.” My fists clenched in disappointment. “The Mallquis are vampires.” Could the Sapa Empire be no better than Yohuachanca? I had dared hope other countries would be free of the Nightlords’ blight. “No, not at all.” Mictecacihuatl shook her head. “Vampires have never truly gone through the Gate of Skulls. They are half-lives staving off my husband’s grasp with blood and malice. The warlock pursuing you has already died, but used an anchor to pull back their soul to the waking world. It is a miserable existence, little better than what your guides are experiencing.” “My predecessors cannot cast spells,” I pointed out. If they could fight the Nightlords themselves, they already would have done so. “The Mallquis might possess more freedom than the anguished souls guiding your steps, but they are cold, dead things nonetheless.” To my surprise, the goddess sounded more sad and disappointed than furious with these mortals trying to cheat her out of her and her husband’s due. “All pleasures are denied to them. Their flesh rots, as does their soul. They are hanged men who would rather cling to their nooses than fall, who would rather gasp for breath and suffer forever than accept their end.” Queen Mictecacihuatl looked into my eyes, her shining gaze full of wisdom. “What kind of existence is that, Iztac?” she asked me with the utter certainty only an eons-old deity could possess. “That is no life worth living. No life at all.” I imagined a horde of gilded tumi skulls standing atop a pillar, much like my predecessors. The previous emperors were willing to sow war and chaos to escape this fate. I could hardly fathom why anyone would force themselves into that state out of their own free will. Then again, I was willing to sacrifice a lot to secure my freedom and avoid the altar. The Sapa sorcerer after me held enough influence within his own nation to enchant a gift meant for a foreign emperor. They were powerful, both magically and socially. For a mighty sorcerer standing atop their own pyramid of blood and power, eternal suffering might seem like an appealing trade-off to cling on to their influence. Or perhaps they bore this pain to protect their realm. Yohuachanca had threatened the Sapa Empire for centuries; the Sapa sorcerer spying on me might believe his nation required his help to stave off the Nightlords’ hunger. Or at least, I hoped so. I wished to believe the Sapa Empire’s rulers cared for their subjects more than the four monsters holding my leash. “Remember this, Iztac,” Queen Mictecacihuatl said. “None can escape the grinding march of time forever. Everyone finds their way to this city one way or another. My husband always reaps his harvest in the end.” “Learn patience,” King Mictlantecuhtli had told me once. “Everything dies in time, even worlds.” This very layer, built from the corpse of a past universe and on top of three others, was proof enough of his wisdom. “Why are you telling me this, oh Queen of the Underworld?” I wondered. “Do you wish me to send the Mallquis to his final rest?” “You are kind, Iztac, but there is no need for your intervention,” Queen Mictecacihuatl replied with amusement. “They will find their rest on their own, given time.” Of course, though I had the feeling I might have to expedite the process. I was the emperor of an enemy nation who had orchestrated an inevitable war for his own benefit. The Mallquis was—or were; I could not exclude the possibility the Sapa Empire hid more than one—more likely to welcome me with threats and curses rather than an offer of friendship. Moreover, they knew I was a Tlacatecolotl now. They might be able to attack me in the Underworld or send someone after me. Dead gods were willing to form contracts with mortals after all, and I had encountered a monster on my way to Mictlan. The world abounded with fools, whether upstairs or down here. One of them might be mad enough to risk Mictlantecuhtli’s wrath and attack me in Mictlan for a high-enough reward. Maybe I’m a bit too hasty here. I tried to assess the facts at hand. This Mallquis is both powerful and a foe of the Nightlords. Even if I can’t forge an alliance with them, we still share a common enemy. I could use a warlock of their caliber. I decided against striking at the Mallquis for now. I still hoped to either make an ally out of them if possible or at least direct them toward the Nightlords. My time would be better spent focusing on establishing friendly communication than engaging in hostilities. This would serve my long-term interests the best. Still… if the worst came to pass, I needed to possess the tools to defend myself. Destroying the Mallquis wasn’t the favored option, but one I had to consider nonetheless. “Might I inquire about your wisdom, oh goddess?” I petitioned Queen Mictecacihuatl. “I will pay any price you request.” The goddess answered me with an amused chuckle. “I will not charge you for mere advice, my dear child.” I stared at her in silence for an instant, much to her confusion. “What bothers you, Iztac?” “Your generosity never ceases to amaze me, oh great queen,” I confessed. After all the backroom deals and haggling I had to endure lately, simple kindness felt both refreshing and unconceivable. “I am truly thankful for your benevolence… and unsure how to return it properly.” “A true gift does not come with strings attached. The world above would be a far better place if the living would simply stop treating each other as potential tools or enemies.” Queen Mictecacihuatl let out a sorrowful rattle. “It takes death for most of them to understand this simple truth.” Tools or enemies. Somehow the Queen’s gentle words filled me with guilt. I could hardly imagine the Sapa sorcerer seeing me as anything else. I suppose the world would indeed be a better place with more Nenetls in it. I hoped destroying the Nightlords would push Yohuachanca on a better path. I had to believe it. That my fight would matter in the long-term, and not just for me. “Although…” Mictecacihuatl put a hand on her mouth as if to stifle a laugh. “If I had a request to make, I would like you to stop distracting Xolotl so much. He has been disregarding his duties.” I chuckled back in embarrassment. Any night Xolotl spent searching for artifacts on my behalf was one where he didn’t guide wayward souls to Mictlan. “Our current deal will probably be our last.” “I suspected as much, my child,” Queen Mictecacihuatl replied with gentleness. “Now, I suppose you wish to know how to deal with a Mallquis?” I nodded dutifully. “You spoke of an anchor; oh goddess. Would destroying that object send their soul back to the Underworld?” “Your mind is sharp, Iztac,” the Queen complimented me. “Yet you miss the forest for the trees. No object can keep a soul in the waking world.” That would have been too easy... “Do they anchor themselves to a place?” The queen’s flayed lips morphed into what could pass for a smile. “Why do you think vampires consume the blood of the living?” My fists clenched. Of course, undeath would require a ghastly price. “Only life can pay for life.” “Indeed,” Queen Mictecacihuatl confirmed. “Unlike vampires, the Mallquis do not require the blood and Teyolia of men, but on their breaths and Ihiyotl. They are kept from passing on by prayers and rituals performed by their living descendants, usually in return for protection.” That sounded… almost reasonable. Prayers were cheap and did not cost the donor’s life, unlike the vampiric thirst for blood. Many in Yohuachanca prayed to their ancestors on lesser altars for luck or wisdom. The only difference was that the Sapa’s dead might actually answer. I did notice a detail in the goddess’s words, however. “You said living descendants, oh queen,” I pointed out. “Do you imply the prayers of strangers would fail?” “The Mallquis are tethered to the world by their own bloodline,” the queen replied. “Moreover, no small prayers would provide powerful enough Ihiyotl to keep the dead among the living. They require regular and elaborate rituals to maintain their existence’s foundation. The interruption of which might prove fatal.” So much like how a maize field requires a flow of water to survive, I would need to disrupt this flow of breath to destroy the Mallquis if we came to blows. My predecessors would probably suggest that I slay the Mallquis’s clan and relatives to starve them out of a bloodline. I did not particularly relish the idea of staining my hands with more innocent blood, especially if simply sabotaging family rituals would achieve the same result. That’s a long-term solution to a long-term problem. I had yet to identify the Mallquis after me, let alone the clan that supported its existence. Threatening them would prove an even taller order. I couldn’t say the same for my own safety. The Mallquis knew exactly what I was and where I was. This gave them a potent advantage if they decided to strike rather than parlay. “How far do you believe the Mallquis’s spying spell extends, Your Majesty?” I questioned the goddess. “Could they pursue me into the depths below?” “My husband stands between this layer and Tlalocan, ensuring that both realms stay separate,” Queen Mictecacihuatl reassured me. “No gaze, no matter how powerful, will pierce through his vigil.” Then I needed to move to Tlalocan the moment negotiations failed. The Mallquis might have been simply testing the waters in preparation for an ambush. The more time I gave them to prepare, the deadlier the strike. I couldn’t afford to wait too long for an alliance that might never materialize. I heard a howl in the wind, followed by a cloud of dust. Xolotl had hurried to join us, running and stopping so fast that he wiped a whirlwind of ashes in his wake. He carried a codex in his jaws. “My queen.” Xolotl bowed graciously before Mictecacihuatl. “How good to see you today.” “My faithful Xolotl,” the queen replied kindly, though it did not prevent her from scolding her vassal. “You have been inattentive in your duties lately.” “This mortal is to blame,” Xolotl said, happily throwing me under the wagon. He dropped the book within his jaws at my feet. “King Mictlantecuhtli has given him a taste for impossible tasks.” “You seem to have succeeded with this one,” I replied while picking up and examining Xolotl’s gift. I immediately recognized it as a dense codex of fossilized skin, bound by bent ribs and other bones. The carving of a skull blinded by three bandages on which the symbols of three suns were painted showed on the cover, right above words written in an ancient form of Yohuachancan. That particular jargon had long fallen out of use, though the red-eyed priests taught it to me at school for the purpose of reading ancient holy texts. Skin Codex of Yohuachanca, Second Volume—The Fire Sun. “What is this book?” I asked, my hand trailing on its surface. It felt unbelievably ancient, and a quick flip of the page showed that some were damaged or missing. Words and detailed illustrations were carved into the leather. Xolotl shrugged. “What you sought. My power guided me to it.” “Why have you formed a contract with Iztac, my faithful hound?” Queen Mictecacihualt questioned Xolotl. The dog god lowered his head in submission. “I wish him to send my brother a greeting.” “Ah.” Queen Mictecacihuatl nodded sharply. “I understand now. This is indeed a once-in-an-eon opportunity. Family has its way of interfering with duty.” I had guessed as much. Xolotl’s twin, Quetzalcoatl, lurked in the Underworld’s penultimate layer, where he shone as the second dead sun. Few traveled so far, and fewer could hope to survive to reach this destination. I activated my Gaze spell to better examine the book and sensed no magic radiating from it. It was a perfectly normal book, as far as I could tell. I flipped through the first few pages, which were too damaged for me to read, only to stop at the drawing of a horrifying figure from the waist up—a sinister humanoid with pale blue skin, rows of sharp fangs that belonged more to a jaguar than a man, and ringed white eyes full of malice. An exquisite headdress of quetzal feathers and harvested snake eyes sat atop its forehead, while a dress of spider webs covered a mighty torso of rippling muscles. This entity screamed power and danger. The paints and colors suffusing the carvings remained vivid—a rarity for such an ancient tome—and the level of detail left me unsettled. I could almost imagine the creature posing for the writer. Queen Mictecacihuatl read over my shoulder. “Very interesting,” she muttered to herself. “This is an accurate representation of our brother, Tlaloc.” Tlaloc. The third sun shining above Tlalocan. “Your brother, oh goddess?” I repeated, unsure of what she meant. “A figure of speech,” the queen elaborated. “Tlaloc and I belong to the third generation of gods that followed the origin of all, Ometeotl, and the four celestial deities.” “It is indeed quite lifelike,” Xolotl commented with a whistle. Unlike his mistress, the dog god appeared unchanged to my Gaze spell. He didn’t bother hiding anything for the sake of lesser beings. “The writer must have stood in Lord Tlaloc’s presence.” That caught my attention. The only way for someone to encounter Tlaloc was to either have been alive during the time of the third sun or ventured deeper into the Underworld than he had. I immediately started translating the page following the illustration. Tlaloc - The Rainmaker, who gives life and takes it away. He who nurtures the earth with bountiful rain and ushers in chaos with violent thunderbolts. Tlaloc is an ancient deity of the third generation, created by the four celestial gods to shape water and sky. He is brother to Mictantecuhtli and Chalchiuhtlicue, his second wife, and master of all that falls from the sky. Rain, hail, lightning, and storms are his to dispense as he pleases. In the dawn of the third world, Tlaloc shouldered the duties of becoming the sun. A prideful god, Tlaloc saw to it that the third race of man would prosper under his care and shame the creations of his predecessors, Quetzalcoatl and Tezcatlipoca. The third iteration of life was blessed with fertile rain, bountiful harvests, and heavenly guidance. The humans built great cities and monuments that honored Tlaloc above all other gods. In his arrogance, Tlaloc made an enemy of Tezcatlipoca, the first sun. Through pernicious sorcery and charming words, Tezcatlipoca lured away the lesser goddess Xochiquetzal, whom Tlaloc loved dearly, and made her his consort. Tlaloc’s grief knew no bounds, bringing everlasting drought upon the world. Mankind begged the god for the return of his blessing, answering the god’s grief with demands and anger. Disgusted by the ungratefulness of mortals, who loved him only for the gifts he bestowed upon them, Tlaloc answered their prayers with a rain of fire. His wrath cleansed the third world of life, until gentle Chalchiuhtlicue soothed his pain with her unconditional love. Only then did Tlaloc agree to let her become the fourth sun and recreate mankind. A chill traveled down my spine as I remembered Tlalocan. Whatever slights the mortals of that realm inflicted on the god, I could hardly fathom what crime deserved such an apocalyptic response. The writer gave a particularly dreadful portrait of the god. Tlaloc is a jealous deity, quick to anger and slow to forgive a slight. Souls who perish from storms, floods, and lightning become his property and are spirited away to a secret paradise of eternal springtime and verdant bliss. There they rest in peace away from the flames that consume Tlalocan, for a god’s generosity shines all the brighter when surrounded by his cruelty. Tlaloc still rages against life’s third incarnation, unable to forgive their imperfections. To travel through Tlalocan means to shoulder his rain of flames and searing gaze. To demand a blessing from him is to court annihilation, for Tlaloc’s gifts are his to deliver as he pleases. However, Tlaloc’s fiery temper is only matched by his fits of boundless generosity. Those who honor Tlaloc without making demands of him will eventually reap a harvest of boons in turn. To honor Tlaloc, one must wear blue paint on their body and a fanged mask to reflect the vain god’s own visage. This offers temporary protection from the fire rains searing Tlalocan’s surface, though it invites the wrath of the Burned Men. To meet with Tlaloc, one must reach his paradise, where his chosen souls live in abundance. This secret island drifts above the clouds, raining fire upon Tlalocan, never staying in one place for long. Those who try to invade it by force always meet a violent end, but those who come bearing gifts will find temporary shelter in the god’s manse. It is imperative that those who approach the great Tlaloc do so without any expectations. Having been disappointed by his own creations’ ungratefulness, Tlaloc loathes beggars and merchants alike. He reserves the worst of his wrath for swindlers. One must never give him the impression that gifts sent his way should come with hidden strings, though he will demand gratitude for the boons he himself bestows upon a visitor. The more I read, the more anxious I became. How was I supposed to petition this deity for his embers if he answered petitions with violence? Stealing them hardly sounded like an option. If Tlaloc caused an apocalypse over perceived ungratefulness, a thief would earn a fate worse than death. Thankfully, the codex dedicated an entire chapter to Tlaloc, which I could study at my leisure over this night and the next. The details about the blue paint and mask also offered me a hint of how to survive Tlalocan’s fiery rains. It would help me prepare for my journey. It seemed Queen Mictecacihualt shared my curiosity about this document. “Where did you find this book, my fair Xolotl?” “In the outer wilds, my queen,” Xolotl replied with a shrug. “This lost book fell from upstairs, like all the others.” This book came from the world of the living… and yet it described a layer of the Land of the Dead Suns in great detail. I flipped through the pages, stumbling upon tarnished maps of a dry, deserted land. A few landmarks caught my attention—a tall spire called “Tamoanchan”… and a black pyramid named “Xilbaba, the House of Fright.” My mother’s lair. I promised myself to look into it more, perhaps against my better judgment. Other chapters described the danger that awaited me with Tlalocan. Horrifyingly lifelike illustrations of flayed men and beasts stood next to walls of text full of warnings. Woe to the dead of Tlalocan, Burned Men and Scorched Spirits. When Tlaloc rained blessings upon the third iteration of life, he filled their hearts with his own pride. The third mankind prospered beyond its predecessors, building great civilizations, harnessing the twin powers of flame and water, and forming alliances with lesser totems. However, they soon grew entitled to the gifts Tlaloc bestowed upon them. Though they honored him above all other gods, they started worshiping themselves in the form of great stone heads. When the third sun wallowed into grief and condemned the land to drought, mortals and lesser deities alike petitioned him for rain. When their prayers fell on deaf ears, their mages raised a great tower, Tamoanchan, hoping to reach the clouds and force them to return rain to the world. This display of arrogance and men’s attempts to take by force the gifts he once bestowed upon them freely enraged Tlaloc. He answered his creations’ prayers for rain with a hail of fire that cleansed the surface of life. The prideful men of the third world and the lesser animal deities who supported their rule had their skin flayed from their flesh by the searing heat. But in the Land of the Dead Suns, it is always possible to be deader. The Burned Men still haunt the ruins of their civilizations and mourn their lost glory, their pride replaced with agony. Old rivalries have long been forgotten, replaced with a kinship born of suffering and undying hatred. Having grown feral, they congregate in primitive tribes and bands that attack outsiders on sight. They do not fear destruction, but neither do they welcome oblivion. In their madness, all they can think of is sharing their pain with the universe. Though the Burned Men will attack any outsiders, they reserve the worst of their fury for those who remind them of Tlaloc. The color blue drives them into a maddened frenzy. Among them are a number of totems who shared their fate when the third world came to an end; though diminished embers compared to mighty Tlaloc’s sun, these Scorched Spirits still wield great power and fury. Tlalocan would truly be a test of strength, wit, and resolve. “There, you should have everything you need to survive on your trip,” Xolotl said impatiently. “Now, it is your turn to deliver on your end of our deal.” “A contract is a contract,” I conceded. This document would indeed help me travel across Tlalocan safely. “What message do you wish me to deliver to Lord Quetzalcoatl?” “Tell him…” For the first time since I mentioned my mother, Xolotl almost appeared well and truly solemn. He considered his words carefully before delivering his message. “Tell him that I forgive him… for leaving me behind.” I did not understand his message’s significance, though Queen Mictecacihuatl appeared to do so. It wasn’t my place to ask for more. I had promised to deliver it. My obligations stopped there. “I shall,” I promised. “You have my word.” “You better follow through, Iztac.” Xolotl nodded thankfully, though his gratitude did not last long. “I have wasted two nights on this errand.” I couldn’t help but chuckle, my hands holding onto the codex. I wasn’t certain Xolotl himself understood the significance of this book. The fact it had fallen from the world of the living while describing the Land of the Dead Suns meant its writer had traveled from one world to another. I had missed a truly important detail in the title. Yohuachanca’s name came from its founder. I held in my hands a book written by the First Emperor himself. part0024. 19WITCH'S DAWN The more the author wrote about Tlaloc, the less flattering the portrait of the god became. Tlaloc prizes the suffering of children, as he resents never bestowing his seed upon Xochiquetzal’s fertile womb. The tears of the young are his favored drink, and their hearts his delicacy. In ancient times, tribes sacrificed the young atop mountains in his name by drowning them in water. It matters not to mighty Tlaloc whether those sacrificed are men or beasts; so long as they are taken before their life can truly begin. Any god who requested human sacrifices was unworthy of worship; I had said as much to Mictantecuhtli. I refused to go against this belief, even for the sake of earning Tlaloc’s embers. “Is Tlaloc truly so…” I looked up at Queen Mictecacihuatl. Now that my deal with Xolotl had been struck, he had left to return to his duties and left me with his mistress. “Cruel?” Queen Mictecacihuatl let out a sigh. “Alas, my brother Tlaloc is much like the storms he rules over. His passions and excesses know no moderation.” That was one way to put it. At least the next paragraph indicated that Tlaloc welcomed sacrificed children into his paradise in Tlalocan after they perished in his name. As if offering them a good afterlife somehow erased the sin of their murder. The more I read about Tlaloc, the more he reminded me of Yoloxochitl. Mad and dangerous to know. I did not wish to stain my hands with more innocent blood, let alone screaming babies, but how could I earn Tlaloc’s favor then? The tome did not list any other gift that might warrant his attention, and the text warned me thoroughly against approaching the god with an offer for trade. I could not deal with Tlaloc as I did with Mictantecuhtli. While the latter had been fair and willing to exchange a service for a service, the former would react with hostility. I could try to steal the embers if all else failed, or trick Tlaloc into giving them away… but robbing a god who had burned an entire world to cinders in a fit of rage struck me as madness. Moreover, I would still need his guidance to enter the next layer. I considered all my options, trying to find a solution that would let me deal with Tlaloc without compromising my principles. Wait… Perhaps I am looking at it the wrong way. So far I had considered approaching Tlaloc on my own while praying to make a good impression—an unlikely prospect. However, there was one person whom Tlaloc would not refuse a request from. My eyes looked up at the sky. The crying sun of Mictlan rained purple tears upon the land below, mourning for the lost mankind she convinced her husband to let her create. “Clever owl,” Queen Mictecacihuatl commented. She had guessed my intentions. “Indeed, when our brother wallowed in grief and fury, Chalchiuhtlicue mended his wounded heart. Now that they have become the suns of two dead worlds, they can only reunite on rare occasions when the cosmos aligns. He will not deny her emissary anything.” Tlaloc wasn’t the one I needed to court. Much like how Mictecacihuatl’s favor earned me an audience with her husband, I needed to convince Chalchiuhtlicue to support me in my quest. However, I immediately realized the problem. “My queen,” I whispered, staring at the sky. “How does one speak with the sun?” The goddess laughed back at me. “You are looking the wrong way, Iztac.” She pointed a finger at my chest. “Search inside, not up.” I did not ponder the queen’s words for long. I had welcomed Chalchiuhtlicue’s embers within my Teyolia and built a connection with her through them. Perhaps I could establish a direct line of communication with the fourth sun through meditation. “Be mindful that Chalchiuhtlicue is in many ways my opposite,” Queen Mictecacihuatl advised me. “Where my husband and I preside over death, Tlaloc and her oversee fertility. She is the patroness of life-giving rivers and childbirth… and the lady of sorrow. Remember, death is cold but never cruel. It is life’s warmth that brings suffering.” “She will ask me to pay a price for her favor,” I guessed. “Yes.” The goddess smiled kindly at me. “Though I suspect she will look fondly on your quest, she will drive a harder bargain than my faithful Xolotl and I.” So long as it did not involve sacrificing children or harvesting their tears, I was willing to negotiate on a great many things. “Thank you for your wisdom, oh goddess,” I said with a respectful bow. “You are kind, my child.” Queen Mictecacihuatl glanced down at my book, her fingers flipping the pages to maps of Tlalocan. “However, I would worry more about reaching our brother Tlaloc than convincing his wife to support you. Great terrors await you in Tlalocan.” My eyes instantly wandered to the most ominous of the noted landmarks—the black pyramid of Xibalba, where my mother nested. The volume dedicated an entire chapter to this sinister place. Xibalba—The House of Fright Among the flames stands Xibalba, the House of Fright. Neither men nor gods built this blackened city and its central pyramid. As far as the tales go, Xibalba arose on its own from the corpse of the third world with the first nightmare, as it appeared in older incarnations of the universe. Xibalba is more than a place; it is a symbol. So long as fear persists among the living, the House of Fright will endure. While the dreams of mortals often show them glimpses of the heavens and the Underworld, nightmares bring slumbering minds to Xibalba. There, the sleeping minds endure terrible trials and torment at the hands of its dreadful inhabitants, dead deities of terror and cruelty. Those who die of fright in their sleep suffer a worse fate—their soul is bound to the blackened city and nurtures the growth of its countless terrors. The lords of Xibalba are a cruel lot, both masters of their realm and its prisoners. They reign over the city from its black pyramid, bickering among themselves and devising ever more clever plots to torment their sleeping visitors. To them, fear is more than a game; it is an art. They respect those who weave the brush of pain and scorn those who let fright conquer them. Xibalba is a dreadful place, but also one built on great and terrible sorceries. Warlocks who venture there might leave with powerful spells and secrets, though the lords of Xibalba fetch a high price for their knowledge. Whether friends or foes, those who enter the city can only earn their freedom by winning a game on the ball court. Few survive to regret it. As a Tzinacantli, I feel drawn to this place. The bat in me sees a nest. A place that my soul can call a home… “‘Tzinacantli?’” I whispered. The rest of the page had become unreadable, erased by time. “What does that mean?” “Tzinacantli,” Queen Mictecacihuatl muttered the word a few times, as if searching for a distant, long-forgotten echo. “It has been many centuries since I have heard of a bat-totem…” A bat-totem? On one hand, it made a great deal of sense. The First Emperor and his daughters were heavily associated with bats, the wings of the night. On the other hand… it did raise interesting questions. “The First Emperor was not a Tlacatecolotl?” I questioned the goddess. “How could he journey across the Underworld then?” “The Tlacatecolotl was not the only kind of Nahualli to travel between life and death,” the queen said. “There used to be two others—the Tzinacantli, the bat-totems; and the Tzahualli, the spider-totems.” I remained silent for a moment as I digested this piece of information. The Parliament of Skulls had never mentioned either of these totems, and the vampires above had no knowledge of the Land of the Dead Suns. If their progenitor could travel to the Underworld, he did not pass on the knowledge or ability to his progeny. As for spiders… I remembered very well my last encounter with one. “I slew a monster in the mists around Mictlan,” I whispered. “A dreadful spider with eight long arms and human hands…” “You must have fought one of the Tzahualli’s dead spawns.” The flayed skin covering Queen Mictecacihuatl’s skull twisted into an expression of disdain and revulsion. “A terrible appetite consumes these Nahualli. They hunger not for the flesh but for frightened spirits.” I shuddered. “The spiders feed on souls.” The goddess nodded sharply. “The Tzahualli hunted our subjects for sport for many centuries. My husband grew weary of their depredations and ordered them wiped out on his layer. Few to no spider-totems have arisen since. If any remain, they are either well-hidden or restrain their appetite to the living world.” Or they might hunt in lower layers. I thought while examining the map of Tlalocan. Mictantecuhtli’s sway only extended to Mictlan. Ancient terrors still lurked beneath our feet. “As for the Tzinacantli, none have visited Mictlan in many centuries, either in life or death,” the goddess said. “I doubt they are born anymore. Their totem does not see fit to dwell within human souls anymore, I suppose.” “That makes me wonder how Nahualli are born,” I muttered out loud, unable to suppress my curiosity. Why was I born with white hair and blue eyes? What cosmic fate decided it? I had asked myself these questions many times, and I would finally receive an answer. “Nahualli are bridges between man and animal,” Queen Mictecacihuatl explained. “Your soul is an emanation of the owl-totem; the mask through which a cosmic force expresses itself. The totem’s influence waxes and wanes with time.” Considering Yohuachanca had been founded six centuries ago and the bat-totems stopped appearing around this time, I quickly gleaned a hint of a connection. “Your Majesty, do you believe the rise of vampires is linked to the Tzinacantlis’ disappearance?” I asked the Queen of the Dead. “It would seem likely, would it not?” Of course it did. Whatever allowed the First Emperor to emerge from the Underworld’s depths as a god affected the totem that granted him his magic in the first place. I had the feeling that the vampire curse could be a corruption of the Tzinacantlis’ transformation, though I could not tell for certain yet. I needed to gather more Skin Codices. The one Xolotl brought to me was only the second volume, which implied the existence of more. The book in my hands had also suffered damage. I might be able to find intact copies in the living world. It would surprise me greatly if the Nightlords and their red-eyed priests did not keep at least records of their progenitor’s writings. “Hide these codices, Centehua,” the Yaotzin had whispered into my ear yesterday. “Hide them from the priests, where they will never be found. Therein lies the true history.” The true history… Lady Sigrun had been looking into secret codices the red-eyed priests sought to hide. It could have been a coincidence, but my gut told me otherwise. Did she learn about the First Emperor’s texts somehow and seek to recover them? Queen Mictecacihuatl’s amused laugh drew me out of my thoughts. “I see I have given you much to think about, Iztac,” she said. “I shall take my leave and leave you to your meditation.” “I apologize, oh goddess,” I said, utterly embarrassed. “I did not mean to show you disrespect.” “You did not. Duty calls to me too.” The goddess smiled kindly at me. “I hope my words have helped you in your quest.” “They did.” I knelt before the queen of the dead in gratitude. “I shall make it up to you on the Day of the Dead.” “I look forward to it,” Queen Mictecacihuatl said with amusement as she floated away into the air. “I wish thee good luck in your coming flights, owl-child.” I wished a thousand blessings upon her while she left, though I doubted a goddess would need them. I had the feeling that the living world would be a much different place if she had dominion over it. Not all gods are cruel. I lost myself in thoughts while sitting under the purple sun with my legs crossed. I rested my hands on my knees and closed my eyes. But few of them are kind. I had to pray Chalchiuhtlicue would prove as understanding as her sister. One did not need to breathe in the Land of the Dead Suns, to the point that Mictlantecuhtli forbade the presence of sound itself in his vicinity. Still, I tried to inhale, to focus on the dust-heavy air flowing into my chest. Wind fueled fire. The breath empowered the flame within my heart. My caged Teyolia warmed up in response to my focus. Though it had grown in power after consuming the embers of the Fourth Sun, it remained small—a fire that demanded more fuel before it could grow large enough to scorch the land and sky. I perceived it as a baleful purple flame shining alone in a sea of darkness under a violet sunset. The rattling noises of Mictlan vanished in the distance, reduced to nothingness. The air became cold and wet, dripping with sorrow. The accursed flame inside me burned with hatred, anger, and ambition. My Teyolia carried my desire for freedom and vengeance against my captors. Lady Chalchiuhtlicue’s sun, meanwhile, radiated sadness. I immediately felt crushed under a terrible weight. An immense burden of suffocating guilt, of crushing despair, descended upon my soul. A sensation of salty, flowing water filled my throat. I’m drowning in invisible tears. It wasn’t as terrible as the night I consumed her embers. My Teyolia had grown stronger since. Enough to let me keep my wits in a goddess’s presence. I realized now why King Mictlantecuhtli delivered to me the Fourth Sun’s embers rather than Chalchiuhtlicue herself. She was simply too wrapped up in her own grief to listen to mortal prayers anymore. I hoped my voice would break through the walls around her heart. “Lady Chalchiuhtlicue?” I whispered through my mouth and the fire of my soul. My flame shone brighter when I uttered these words, though the sun above it remained unmoved. And why wouldn’t it be? The goddess mourned over a dead world. How could my plea compare? Still, I would not relent. “Lady Chalchiuhtlicue, Great Sun of the Underworld and Lady of Water,” I beseeched her, louder. “Please heed my prayer.” The goddess did not answer. But she did listen. I could feel her will in the air. A brief respite in the silent downpour of sorrow-tainted sunlight. A lightening of the pressure crushing my heart. I sensed I would have only one short chance to make my case, so I chose my words carefully. “I will soon venture into Tlalocan to meet with your husband.” The pressure evaporated. Inside this spiritual landscape, Mictlan’s purple sun took the shape of a great eye looking down on me. I had Chalchiuhtlicue’s attention for now. “I sought your embers from King Mictlantecuhtli and welcomed them into my heart. I am thankful for this gift.” I gathered my thoughts, choosing my words carefully. “But the living world… It’s full of pain. My people lead short lives filled with terror and suffering under the yoke of tyrants. My soul suffocates from the noose tightening around my heart.” Even in my mind, I could still see the Nightlords’ chains dancing around my Teyolia. No sunlight could hide my slave brands. “Our children are sacrificed to false gods, who drink their blood and consume their souls,” I argued, knowing this argument would resonate with the goddess of childbirth. “I understand you feel terrible about what happened to this world and the one that came before… but I beg you to help me save mine, to offer a brighter future to the living children above this stone sky.” Chalchiuhtlicue didn’t answer me with words. I did not expect her to. She had become a sun, a force of nature as pervasive as the earth and the wind. Instead, I sensed her will in the air, in the subtle wave of warmth that washed over me like a gentle wave. As Queen Mictecacihuatl guessed, her sister appeared to sympathize with my plea. “I need your husband’s embers and power to shatter my chains,” I whispered. “To bring salvation to the world above. I know you have given me much already, but I must request your help once again. I will pay the price you ask for.” So long as it does not involve shedding children’s blood. But that thought I kept to myself. I wondered if the goddess heard this stray thought of mine. An eerie silence filled my mind, only broken by the brief sound of running water. A single raindrop of light fell before my Teyolia, and the dream came to an end. A powerful force washed my soul away. When my eyes snapped open, I found I hadn’t moved an inch from my meditative spot. I was still sitting with my legs crossed, none the worse for wear. But something had changed. A sealed urn sat before me. It was a small cylinder made from blue-colored ceramic, barely larger than my fist. Carvings of Tlaloc’s fanged visage covered its surface, alongside pictures of mating serpents. I noticed an inscription written in a language I did not recognize, though I somehow managed to divine its meaning as if a spirit whispered it to me. For my love. As far as divine commandments went, this one was abundantly clear. I was to act as Chalchiuhtlicue’s messenger and deliver a gift to her husband. The task sounded simple enough… until I examined the package more closely. The urn weighed surprisingly little, but I immediately felt its fragility the moment I seized it with my talon. A simple shock would shatter it to pieces. Moreover, the urn was hermetically sealed. I could not check its contents. My Gaze spell could pierce through illusions, but it couldn’t see through ceramic. I detected no magic coming from this gift, no enchantment that would protect it from harm. The gift was exactly what it looked like. A fragile urn I would have to transport intact across a fiery, monster-infested wasteland. “Crap,” I muttered. The Sapa sorcerer did not bother me for the rest of the night. With little to no interruptions, I split my time in the Underworld between deciphering the Skin Codex and preparing for my journey. While I assumed I would find Tlaloc’s paradise by flight, if the fiery weather proved impossible to navigate through, I assessed a few high places where this promised land would likely drift—dreadful Xibalba; the ruined tower of Tamaochan, which dominated the ravaged world; and holy mountains once dedicated to the rain god. I knew which of these areas I would visit first. For my sake and that of my father’s soul. ‘The lords of Xibalba fetch a high price for their knowledge.’ The codex’s dire warning haunted me. My mother had left for this place with a bounty of stolen souls. I couldn’t help but fear the worst. I prayed to whatever gods would listen that my mother wasn’t as heartless as they said. I wanted to believe otherwise, that there was a perfectly justifiable reason behind her behavior and that her crimes had been committed in the service of a greater cause. Much like mine. My plan to travel across Tlalocan was relatively simple—wear the appropriate mask and body paint to survive the fire rains, then weave a Veil to make me look like one of the Burning Men. Tlaloc should be able to see through my disguise and thus spare me from his incandescent wrath, while the ghosts haunting his realm should be fooled by my illusions. Or at least, I hoped so. I couldn’t tell whether my plan would work until I crossed the threshold into the second layer. Moreover, transporting the urn and the codex without damaging either demanded extensive preparations. I needed to carry them in a bag that would protect them both from fire, heat, shocks, and the Burning Men’s inevitable attacks. Not to mention that I had to obtain blue body paint and a mask of Tlaloc. Thankfully, the Market of Years offered a few solutions. “Are these ribs?” I asked the merchant as I examined his product—a frame made of two stout femurs the length of poles and bound by curved bones, supporting a carrying compartment made of layers of thick white scales. “And these…” “Are Macetail scales,” the skeletal merchant explained with a proud nod. “Took me fifty years to collect the entire set!” Of all the beasts that walked the living world above, few were more difficult to slay than a Macetail. While a Feathered Tyrant possessed incredible strength and ferocity, a Macetail’s body was covered in thick bone armor strong enough to shatter obsidian blades and repel arrows. The few creatures who dared to pierce this protection also needed to contend with the tail-weapon that gave them their name. Living merchants usually transported goods on cacaxtli, stout carrying frames used by porters to ferry loads across the empire. This contraption reminded me of them, though most were made of wood rather than near indestructible bones. It would cost a fortune among the living. “Can I try it?” I asked and quickly received the merchant’s blessing. The bone cacaxtli weighed heavily on my shoulders when I put it on, to the point where I nearly collapsed on my back. “Ouch!” “Macetail scales are quite heavy,” the merchant noted with amusement. That was one way to put it. I doubted I could move with it without using either the Doll spell or shapeshifting into a giant owl. “Don’t you have anything lighter?” “Didn’t you ask for the sturdiest protection?” The skeleton shrugged his bone shoulders. “I have lighter carrying frames, but they’ll burn and break easily enough.” I cursed upon realizing I had little choice. The trader was right—lighter cacaxtli wouldn’t survive the journey to Tlalocan, let alone my belongings. Would reinforcing my body in the living world strengthen me in this one? I assumed as much since I kept most of my flesh in the Land of the Dead Suns. Otherwise, I would have to stick to my owl form for most of my journey. “Fine, I’ll take it,” I said while grumbling. “Good,” the merchant replied with a chuckle. “It’ll cost you a year of entertainment.” I managed to haggle the price down to a full night of unforgettable, illusory pleasures. The merchant—a dead citizen of Yohuachanca, as it turned out—had always fantasized about the life of an emperor and wished to experience it for himself. For his sake, I decided to stick to showing him the harem, the gardens, the baths, and the empty delights the palace had to offer. I believe he wouldn’t appreciate seeing Yoloxochitl’s special brand of motherly kindness, her garden of hanged guards, or the murders and slavery. After outlining our deal, I promised to return the next night to deliver my payment. He agreed to hold my belongings until my return, which I thanked him for. I already felt my mind threatening to wake up. The darkness that preceded my awakening always filled me with dread. Each time I opened my eyes, I expected Yoloxochitl or one of her sisters to wait for me with some new cruelty. My trips to the Land of the Dead Suns had become a respite, a safe haven from the daily atrocities the Nightlords prepared for me. As odd as it sounded, I would rather linger with the dead than stay among the living. I woke up the same way I fell asleep—alone in my bed and surrounded by guards. However, the men standing watch in the morning were not the same ones that escorted me last night. Four giants stood in each corner of my room, each of them wielding a shield of hardened wood and obsidian-tipped spears. They were threateningly tall, pushing nearly eight feet with wide shoulders and arms thicker than a tree’s trunk. Padded cotton armor protected their muscled chest, forearms, and legs. I could not see their faces. Each of them wore dreadful bronze masks covering their entire head themed after various animals—a jaguar, a crocodile, a serpent… I immediately sensed that something was wrong with these men. Their body proportions felt… off. Their arms were slightly too long, and their legs were too thick. Their shields appeared too heavy for a man to carry with one hand as they did. I noticed stitches and scars on the parts of their skin left exposed, as if they had suffered terrible surgery under a healer’s knife. And they were pale. Almost as much as me. “Who are you?” I asked them, unable to suppress the wariness in my voice. None of the guards answered me. In fact, I detected no hint that they even heard me. I slowly rose from my bed, half-naked, and walked up to the closest of them. “Look at me,” I ordered. “In the eyes.” The giant lowered his mask, letting me peek at what hid within their masks’ holes. Nothing. I couldn’t see eyes of any sort, whether red, blue, or black. Those masks held nothing but darkness. Moreover, I immediately noticed an unsettling detail… or rather, the absence of it. I could not hear these guards breathe. “Are you alive?” I asked, though I could already guess the answer. That… thing stared back at me without a word. “Can you take off your mask?” The guard shook its head in utter silence. “Then cut your shoulder open with your spear.” A man would have at least hesitated. The creature in front of me turned its own weapon against itself the moment I finished my sentence. It did not doubt my order, nor did it consider its own well-being. It simply cut a line across its naked right shoulder. The skin appeared as thick as the padded cotton armor protecting the rest of the body to me. The same boiling black tar boiling within the Nightlords’ Abode of Darkness dripped from the wound. It quickly cooled when exposed to air, sealing the gash in seconds. What kind of creature was this? It was no vampire, but nothing alive either. I wondered if it could even think for itself. I did not have to wonder for long. My chambers’ doors opened, and half-naked female servants walked in to dress me, their heads looking down to avoid my gaze. I noticed Necahual was among them. She dared to send me a quick glance, one that hardly lasted a second. Her eyes quickly darted to the new guards in dread. A man I did not know followed in their wake. He was tall and strong, though not as much as the four giants, with gray hair and lined features. This surprised me since his eyes were a pale shade of red. Priests usually stopped aging when they received the Nightlords’ blessing, yet this stranger appeared well past his prime. Though he wore a simple cotton cloak, he walked with the same presence as a trained warrior. “Greetings, oh Great Emperor of the Heavens and Earth.” The man knelt before me, his voice strong like clashing rocks. “I am Tezozomoc. The four goddesses have selected me to replace the late Tlacaelel. I pray Your Imperial Majesty will find my services agreeable.” I hoped so too. Killing too many of my advisors on such short notice would arouse suspicion. I recognized the name too. Lady Sigrun mentioned him as Tlacaelel’s most likely successor—correctly too. What else did she call him? Ah, yes. Someone with age and experience who wouldn’t rock the boat. I studied the man carefully as my servants dressed me up in my imperial robes and set the breakfast table. Whether or not he would prove more tolerable than Tlacaelel did not matter to me—he remained a thrall to the Nightlords and thus my enemy. Still, I decided to test the waters. To assess if he would be another butt-kissing snake or someone I could at least tolerate the presence of. “What happened to my previous guards?” I asked, waving a hand at my new set of jailers. “Those four clearly lack certain… attributes.” “In the light of your personal guards sinful and repeated fits of incompetence, the goddesses decided to change them.” I did not ask if they had been fired or killed, though I hoped for the latter. “Lady Sugey selected these four attendants personally.” “Selected,” I replied, “or created?” Tezozomoc lowered his head further to better hide his ignorance. “I am not privy to a goddess’s secrets, Your Imperial Majesty.” At least he spoke straight and to the point. He hadn’t bombarded me with empty flattery either so far, which I considered an improvement over his predecessor. However, I had the feeling I wouldn’t extract much information from him. The Nightlords clearly didn’t believe him to be important enough to share their secrets with. “What of my consorts?” I asked, the memory of Nenetl thrown across a wall by the Jaguar Woman flaring in my mind. “Are they safe and well?” “Lady Nenetl is still recovering from her illness under the goddesses’ care.” I suppressed a wince and a pang of guilt at Tezozomoc’s wording. The Parliament of Skulls had already warned me about what the Nightlords would do to Nenetl. “Lady Ingrid is safe and sound, as is Lady Chikal.” I tensed up. “What of Eztli?” “The Flower of the Heart called Lady Eztli to her side,” Tezozomoc replied calmly. I immediately noticed Necahual tensing up as she set the breakfast table. “Both apologize for not greeting you this morning. The goddess herself promised to visit you tonight, once her heavenly duties are fulfilled.” I did not particularly look forward to seeing Yoloxochitl again, but it would let me check on Eztli and gather more information on the Nightlords’ secret weapon. “I look forward to it,” I lied. Tezozomoc nodded sharply before taking a dark look at the servants. “If it pleases Your Imperial Majesty, may we speak in private?” Oh? Come to think of it, I noticed that he had evasively qualified Nenetl’s condition as an “illness” rather than anything more specific. He was clearly worried about eavesdroppers. “My slave Necahual will stay to pour our drinks,” I replied, startling my mother-in-law. I gave her a sneer of pure and utter arrogance. “Mother Yoloxochitl taught her how to hold her tongue.” Necahual clenched her jaw in restrained fury, but swallowed her anger and nodded obediently. Tezozomoc raised an eyebrow with a hint of disapproval. A minute later, the three of us sat at the breakfast table with only my guards for company. Today’s meal involved a platter of fish and potatoes imported from our southern territories. I ordered Necahual to serve the two of us, much to her clear frustration. It was for her own sake. I had convinced Yoloxochitl to spare Necahual on the grounds that I desired to thoroughly humiliate and dominate her. Considering the rampant paranoia that would follow the Sapa disaster, I needed to constantly reinforce this lie among outsiders. This plan would spare her an early grave. That, and I had to admit, it felt somewhat enjoyable to boss her around after the way she treated me in the past. “First of all, I formally apologize on the priesthood's behalf for last night’s incident,” Tezozomoc said. Astonishingly, he even sounded sincere; that or he lied better than Tlacaelel. “This will not happen again.” “I hope so, for your sake.” It didn’t take me much to channel righteous anger. I felt that way all the time. “My consort and I nearly perished.” “I can guarantee Your Imperial Majesty that there will be no repeat of last night’s incident,” Tezozomoc stated with confidence. “We have detained the Sapa delegation and are currently investigating the palace for any sign of foreign influence among Your Imperial Majesty’s servants.” “Is that why you wished to discuss the situation in private, Tezozomoc?” “Yes.” My advisor coughed as Necahual filled his chocolate cup. “Would His Imperial Majesty allow me to make a personal remark?” Tlacaelel never asked permission, though he disguised his venom under a veneer of sweetness. “What bothers you?” “I do not believe it wise to mistreat those working under oneself, even a bed slave,” Tezozomoc said. “I understand that Your Imperial Majesty might seek to demean that woman for the wrongs she caused you in your former mortal life, but she has functioning ears, and her heart will fester with resentment. She might slander Your Imperial Majesty or worse, share her knowledge with enemies of the state.” I stared blankly at Tezozomoc, searching for any hint of hypocrisy. I found none. He truly believed in his own advice, the way the old grew ever more confident of their own wisdom with time. Of course, he conveniently ignored that I was myself a prisoner bound to the altar through no fault of my own other than four vampires’ caprice. I guessed his point stood nonetheless. If the Nightlords hadn’t wished to earn my hatred, they should have treated me better. “What is stronger than hatred, Tezozomoc?” I asked my advisor. “Faith,” he replied without hesitation. You’re wrong, fool. I glanced at Necahual, who did her best to hide her anger and resentment under a mask of blankness. Enough hatred can overcome anything. “You’re wrong,” I said out loud. “Fear is stronger than hate. Mother Yoloxochitl taught her that much.” I met Necahual’s eyes, which I found startlingly familiar. I had worn the same expression in the past. “After all,” I said. “That’s how she kept me under her yoke for all those years.” I watched as the fire of Necahual’s anger was blown away by a surprise and then a very special kind of shame. My mother-in-law glanced at our fish platter, which was similar to the rare feast her husband and daughter had been allowed to partake in while she forced me to serve them. I recognized the emotion in her gaze all too well. Guilt. To my own astonishment, Necahual seemed to finally reflect on what she put me through now that she was in a similar situation. Could she actually improve as a person? I dared not keep my hopes up considering our disagreements, but the mere possibility amazed me. Tezozomoc mistook Necahual’s shame for an admission of despair, though he appeared doubtful of the point I was trying to make. “I pray Your Imperial Majesty is wiser than I am.” “So do I,” I replied imperiously before changing the subject. “I will witness these interrogation sessions personally. These fools tried to have me killed. I want them to regret it.” Moreover, there might be a chance that one of the ambassadors possessed information on the Mallquis and how to contact them. Unfortunately, I would likely have to execute them, if only to create more outrage among the Sapa people. Now that I had set ablaze the fire of war, I needed to nurture it. “Of course.” Tezozomoc bowed his head obediently. Unlike Tlacaelel, he didn’t appear keen on obstructing me. “While the next few days will be dedicated to the New Fire Ceremony as expected, I have taken the liberty of changing your morning’s schedule to include a meeting with Lady Chikal and other military advisors. Imperial generals have been recalled to the capital as per the Bird of War’s orders. They should arrive within a week’s time.” The Nightlords did not waste time when it came to bloodshed. So far, so good. My predecessor nearly launched a successful coup by recruiting generals, and according to the Parliament of Skulls a few rebels among them remained undiscovered. The coming days would provide the opportunity to cultivate allies inside the military, or at least test their loyalties. However, tonight’s issues with the cacaxtli showcased a small issue, which a look at my arm only confirmed. Namely, I was no warrior. I had started to gain weight—the good kind—now that I ate to my heart’s content, but I remained rather gaunt for my age. My predecessors warned me that soldiers followed the brave and the victorious. While I knew only my magic could overcome the Nightlords, I could not reveal my spells until I was ready to take on the Nightlords in open battle, if at all. To the empire’s warriors, I was no future sorcerer and sun-eater, but a frail emperor unfit to be a simple porter. They would die for their god-appointed emperor, but not for Iztac Ce Ehecatl. I needed to change that, to become a figure they would love and respect. And for that, I had to look the part. “War is coming to Yohuachanca, and our enemies will strike at me again,” I declared. “I must prepare for it. See to it that my schedule involves fighting lessons. I must be able to defend myself in combat if the need arises.” Tezozomoc visibly frowned. “Your Imperial Majesty, your concerns are unwarranted,” he said, his eyes wandering to the silent guards. “No foe will approach you ever again in your new guards’ presence.” “I pray you’re right,” I replied with a sharp smile. “But that remains to be proven.” The rebuke caused Tezozomoc to scowl. Good. I’d long noticed that people worked harder when they had something to prove. “I understand,” he said. “I shall see to it that Your Majesty receives the best trainers. Lady Chikal will prove a most worthy sparring partner, I believe.” I hoped so too. Chikal was the consort I knew the least about so far, the one best at keeping her true feelings hidden. The next few days would be my chance to understand her better and to see if I could make an ally of her. I dismissed Tezozomoc after breakfast with the pretext that I wished to prepare for my morning meditation. My new advisor excused himself with a deep, respectful bow. Unlike Tlacaelel, I sensed no subtle mockery in the gesture. Either this man played a very subtle game, or he was perhaps the kind of priest I feared the most. A true believer. “It is best to lay low for a while,” I whispered into Necahual’s ear as she cleaned the platter, too low for the guards to hear. “War is coming, and the Nightlords will cut off any head that stands too tall.” I briefly worried about Lady Sigrun before realizing that she had probably survived half a dozen or more disasters across her career. My mother-in-law stared into my eyes, studying my face. I did not need magic to tell what crossed her mind. Necahual was smart. She must have guessed that I had somehow started this very same war and somehow gotten away with it. However, her confusion did not last long. Necahual’s expression darkened, her jaw clenching and her lips straining. She gulped, her eyes briefly fidgeting from one side of the room to the other. Her trembling fingers clenched back and forth. She wanted to ask me something. Something that ashamed her. I squinted at her. “What is it?” She finally mustered the courage to whisper back an answer. “Teach me.” “Teach you what?” “Witchcraft. What… What you and your mother can do.” Necahual inhaled sharply, as if confessing to a secret sin. “I want you to teach me.” part0025. 20THE WAR OF THE FLOWERS “Witchcraft?” A mocking rattle echoed through the Reliquary, deep and scornful. I didn’t like it. There were few things as disturbing as laughing skulls. A good chunk of my predecessors appeared to find Necahual’s demand terribly amusing. The rest… far less so. “Magic is a blessing, not an art,” the grimmer skulls said dismissively. “One must be born with the aptitude before they can learn anything. Try as she may, this Necahual will never become a Nahualli. It simply cannot be done.” I feared as much. If becoming a sorcerer was easy, spellcasting traditions would have spread far and wide by now. I still didn’t understand why Necahual even asked me to teach her; I thought her encounter with my mother had instilled in her a visceral disgust for anything magical. “She will not take that answer well,” I muttered. Necahual had appeared strangely determined. “Then perhaps you should just get rid of her,” my predecessors suggested. “This Necahual already knows too much to our liking. She is a security risk.” “I will not kill her,” I replied. Besides the fact that I needed allies, Eztli would never forgive me for it. “I believe she will understand if I tell her the truth.” My first instinct was to tell Necahual of the Day of the Dead and induct her into Queen Mictecacihuatl’s priesthood. Then she could touch the divine, albeit briefly. “We hope she will listen,” my predecessors said without really believing it. “But heed our warning. Mortals rarely react well to being denied their heart’s desire. At best, she might try to fruitlessly learn on her own, wasting her time and bringing attention upon her; at worst, she will accuse you of keeping secrets from her and blackmail you. Watch her carefully.” I nodded in agreement and prepared to move on to more pressing matters when a small voice broke ranks with the Parliament. “If I may…” A particular skull bulged out of the pillar, its empty eyes radiating an otherworldly light. “What is this Necahual’s day sign?” “Her full name is Necahual Ce Quiahuitl,” I answered with a frown. What did her day sign have to do with the matter at hand? “Ce Quiahuitl,” a hundred dead emperors whispered as one. “The first day of the Rain Month. No wonder she turned to herbalism, her day sign blesses the soothsayers and bewitchers.” “The First Day of Rain carries its curses too,” the lone skull said with a content tone. “She could become a Mometzcopinque.” The word did not mean anything to me, though the other skulls appeared to recognize it. “Doubtful,” the other emperors argued back. “If she had a patron’s eye, it would have already manifested.” “Is one not standing before us?” the dissenting skull replied while gazing at me. “With the embers of divinity within him… our successor would count for the ritual.” I straightened up as my predecessors started whispering among each other so quickly that I only grasped a few tidbits. “It could be…” “Would she even agree to it?” “The risks…” “The rewards…” I waited for the dead emperors to reach a consensus, which eventually, they did. “Listen well, Iztac Ce Ehecatl,” the skulls whispered, none louder than the previous dissenter. “This Necahual will never become a true sorceress nor wield magic of her own. However… this does not mean she cannot borrow it.” “Borrow magic?” I almost asked “from whom” until I connected the dots. “From me?” “Possibly.” Hundreds of hollow gazes stared at my chest. “Absorbing the Fourth Sun’s embers into your Teyolia has granted you a spark of divinity. Whether it will be enough to sustain the ritual we have in mind remains to be seen.” That… was strange. Sharing my magic would let me recruit powerful allies. I would have expected the Parliament of Skulls to mention the option earlier. The fact they hadn’t meant that it carried downsides. “Would sharing my power diminish it?” I asked. This seemed the most likely explanation to me. “Somewhat,” my predecessors confirmed. “There are paths for individuals eager to embrace the supernatural. Costly, lesser paths, but paths nonetheless. Becoming a Mometzcopinque is one of them. It is a dark road open only to women born on specific day signs.” Requirements which Necahual appeared to fit, from what I understood. “Magic always carries a cost,” I pointed out. “One paid to you, our successor,” the skulls replied. “To become a Mometzcopinque, a would-be witch must find a patron willing to sponsor their ascension. Usually, this patron is either a god or a spirit seeking to expand their influence in the living world. Once a pact is formed, the witch and patron partake in a ritual that transforms the former into a Mometzcopinque.” “What would this transformation mean for Necahual?” “She will gain unique powers,” the Parliament explained. “She will be able to transform her arms into wings and her feet into sharp talons at will. Her nails will cut through stone. Her hands will carry the strength of ten men, and flames will fall from the sky at her command to set her foes alight. She will become a fearsome creature that can rival the Nightkin in strength, but one that can walk undetected in the sun.” “But she will never equal the Nightlords,” I guessed. Still, this sounded like a useful transformation, especially if Necahual could still hide in plain sight. “What is the catch?” “It is twofold. First of all, most patrons request their new servant to kill in their name in return for their sponsorship, such as through blood sacrifices. Most Mometzcopinques were feared as childkillers or slayers of men.” “A requirement I can waive, I hope.” Otherwise, Necahual would become no better than a Nightkin. “Yes, but the pact’s true price is much greater.” The Reliquary’s darkness only thickened. “A Mometzcopinque sells their soul to their patron.” My fists clenched on their own. “The Mometzcopinque ritual involves tying the witch’s Teyolia to their patron’s through a bond that only death alone can break,” the Parliament explained grimly. “The patron’s heart-fire will fuel the witch’s transformations, but from that moment on her life is borrowed. If the patron decides to take back their gift at any point or perishes on their own, their inner fire will waste away to nothing.” Now I understood why few spirits offered that deal. “This is no different than slavery,” I said, somewhat unsettled. “No. This is worse. There is no escape other than death.” It was no different from how the Nightlords recruited followers. They promised foolish mortals power and immortality, bribing them with eternal youth and respect while shackling their souls as they did with mine. They used their magic to own people, in both body and soul. Turning Necahual into Mometzcopinque would be just transforming her into a Nightkin—one that answered to me and could walk in the daylight. I couldn’t walk down the same path. “You said it yourself, our successor. The greater the magic, the greater the cost.” The skulls let out a grim rattle. “Of course, nothing prevents you from letting this Necahual do as she wishes. You can offer her power and then loosen the leash around her neck until you both forget that it exists.” “But it will never go away.” Besides the fact that enslaving another human being in such an intimate, permanent way disturbed me, I doubted Necahual would agree to it. The man she distrusted would hold her life in his hands until his own death. “This… Is there no other alternative?” “None that we know of,” the Parliament replied. “Not all mortals are meant to dance with the gods, Iztac Ce Ehecatl. Most fade away in the shadow of brighter stars.” Quite cruel words, but they sadly described Necahual’s life quite well. She had lost the love of her life to my mother, her daughter and husband to a vampire, and even her freedom to me… I wondered if her desire to learn witchcraft was an attempt to step into the light she envied so much. Will she accept her place or grasp for more? I would have expected the first, but then again, I would have never guessed Necahual would change her mind about magic. She still had the ability to surprise me. “Let us speak of other things, my predecessors,” I said. Necahual was a minor issue for now, and I had more pressing matters to deal with. “What of the Mallquis? How should I handle it?” “Our priority should be to identify the Mallquis’s identity first and foremost,” the Parliament decided. “So long as they remain hidden, they hold an advantage. We doubt they will inform the Nightlords of your status as a Tlacatecolotl, but so long as the Mallquis remains unaccounted for, that information might make its way back to our tormentors.” That was what I dreaded most. If the Mallquis shared the truth with Sapa officials, Yohuachancan spies might stumble upon it by complete accident and report back to the Nightlords. I needed to establish contact with the Mallquis as soon as possible, if only to ensure that they would keep my secret to themselves. “Should I consult the Yaotzin?” I asked. “You can try, but we doubt it will suffice,” my predecessors replied, as I feared. As I had seen with the Nightlords, powerful sorcerers can shield their secrets from the wind of chaos. “However, we have pondered more… mundane ways to identify them. Have you heard of the Ayllus, our successor?” “I have indeed.” I happened upon the name when I did research on the Sapa Empire. “They are groups of families, whether bound by blood or marriage, that make up most of the Sapa Empire’s population. They are very similar to our own Calpulli.” “Good,” the Parliament complimented me. “Most Ayllus can trace their existence back to a common ancestor, an Apu. Since the Sapa people share a deep bond with the mountains in which they live, an Apu’s existence is often confused with the spirit of the mountain where they were born and buried.” I immediately caught on. “You suspect the Mallquis to be one of these Apus?” “We find it plausible,” the skulls replied. “Apus receive worship from the communities that occupy their mountains. This would provide ample faith to sustain an ambitious Mallquis.” I pondered this for a while and quickly realized I had a potential lead. “The tablet’s spells were carved into its very stone,” I muttered to myself. “If I can find which mountain quarry it came from or where it was carved, then the local Apu will likely be the sorcerer that enchanted it in the first place.” “Your wits have sharpened, our successor.” My predecessors sounded genuinely pleased. “You are learning quickly.” “Only thanks to your guidance,” I replied, though I did appreciate the compliment. “I will interrogate the ambassadors. Perhaps they possess the information, or at least a lead.” It might take time, but once I had identified the Apu, I could see how to establish direct communication with them. I still hoped to negotiate… if not an alliance, then at least a non-aggression pact of some kind. Since the Mallquis’s existence relied on that of their Ayllu, I could perhaps trade the latter’s safety for their assistance. For now, I could only gather information. After discussing the Sapa situation at length, the Parliament of Skulls gave me a list of the generals involved in Nochtli the Fourteen’s failed coup. I couldn’t tell yet which of them had perished or been replaced since, but I would soon confirm that once they reached the capital. I left the Reliquary with a great deal of information and my predecessors’ blessing. Tezozomoc and my mother-in-law were waiting for me outside alongside my silent guards. “Did your morning meditation grant you enlightenment, Your Imperial Majesty?” Tezozomoc asked courteously. “Somewhat,” I replied evasively before turning to my mother-in-law. “You will follow me all day long, Necahual. If I am to train my body, I might need a healer on hand.” Necahual bowed dutifully. She understood I meant to talk with her in private once we found the opportunity. “As you wish, Your Majesty.” My eyes wandered to her hands, joined together in suppressed anxiety. I had told her I would consider her request after my morning meditation, so she likely expected an answer soon. If she knew the price to pay for power, I doubted that she would be so eager to hear from me. I shrugged and walked away with my followers in tow. As promised, Tezozomoc had set up a meeting with Chikal and other war advisors in my council room. The latter turned out to be the leaders of Yohuachanca’s four major warrior societies—the Nightflowers, the Jaguar Warriors, the Eagle Knights, and the infamous Shorn Ones. While over sixty generals oversaw Yohuachanca’s vast army, military fraternities transcended the frontiers between platoons. The men that waited for me in the council room represented the elite of my troops and never left the capital. They would form the backbone of the Sapa campaign. “Lord Emperor.” Chikal welcomed me with a deep bow. She had come dressed for battle, as usual. I wondered if she ever let go of her cotton armor. “I am relieved to see you safe and sound.” “I see you have been informed of last night’s treacherous attack, Chikal,” I said while sitting on a cushion. Everyone else in the room bowed and avoided my gaze. “Let’s not mince words. We are now at war with the Sapa Empire.” Chikal nodded slowly, her eyes squinting at me. Was that a hint of suspicion I detected in her gaze? It was true I had pushed for a conflict with the Sapa Empire for a while… Chikal remained by far the most enigmatic of my four consorts. Nenetl was about as transparent and innocent as a young woman could be; Ingrid was a social climber dedicated to strengthening her family’s influence; and Eztli… Eztli was a tortured soul. I would go as far as to say that I had come to understand all of them, that I had gotten a solid grasp of their personalities and aspirations. I even shared intimate moments with each of them. Chikal, however, had never once lowered her guard since the moment I met her. I knew her history as a conquered queen who had betrayed a sister city for the sake of her own people, but I wasn’t certain which conclusions she had drawn from the experience. Had she given up on fighting back against the Nightlords, like Lady Sigrun? Or did she secretly hold the small hope of overthrowing them once the stars aligned in her favor? I needed to obtain answers to these questions, one way or another. “I vow to assist my Lord Emperor in the battles to come,” Chikal replied dutifully after correcting her expression. “As do the men behind me.” Four soldiers knelt behind Chikal. I appraised them carefully. All of them were taller than me, though not nearly as much as my monstrous guards. The largest and most muscled of them belonged to the Shorn Ones, as his unique appearance indicated. Much like every member of his elite order, his head was completely shaved apart from a long braid falling over his left ear. The right side of his fearsome face was painted blue, the other red. His war costume was laced with gold and blue feathers. Every single patch of his exposed skin bore a battle scar. All Shorn Ones swore never to take a step backward on the pain of death, even when faced with enemy blades. I recognized the Eagle Warrior and the Jaguar Knight from their attire—the former wore exotic padded armor adorned with feathers, and the other with jaguar fur. Otherwise, they couldn’t be any more different. The Eagle Warrior was a lithe, handsome young man around ten years older than me, with a calm, placid expression. The Jaguar Knight, though muscular, was getting on in his years. His hair was streaked with gray, and his face was wrinkled by old scars. Still, his warm smile made him appear less intimidating than expected. I distrusted the fourth man the moment I met his eyes. The crimson hue marked him as a thrall to the Nightlords. He was more gaunt than his fellows, but his long black hair and fearsome face made him appear more threatening nonetheless. He alone went shirtless, though he wore a crown of flowers and pants of maguey fibers. “Introduce yourself to your emperor,” Tezozomoc ordered on my behalf. “I am Patli, Grandmaster of the Nightflowers,” the man with the flower crown said. His voice was deeper than a cavern, his tone unyielding. “I swear to you that no foe will harm you on my watch.” The Shorn One slammed his fist against his chest. “Coaxoch’s blade stands ready, Your Majesty.” “My parents gifted me the name of Amoxtli, Lord Emperor,” the Jaguar Knight said with a warm smile that did not reach the eyes. “I have served twenty of your predecessors. I hope you shall find no complaints with my service.” The Eagle Warrior, as the youngest, dutifully introduced himself last. “This one’s name is Cuauhteztli, oh Great Lord of the Universe. Your will is my command.” None of them have been replaced. A fact which pleased me greatly. The Parliament of Skulls had given me extensive details on each of these men and their allegiances. Patli, as befitting of an order meant to protect the emperor and generals on behalf of the Nightlords, placed his loyalty in his false gods. Nochtli the Fourteenth spent most of his reign plotting around the man’s gaze. I could trust him to protect me from outside threats and assassinations, but he would report any treachery to his vampiric masters. Coaxoch was a wild card. A brute who cared little for politics and allegiances. The Shorn Ones made a vow never to retreat from battle, and the man lived up to it. He lived for battle and mayhem. The enemy’s identity did not matter, so long as the blood flowed. However, the man fought for the strongest side. He had promised Nochtli his support in the coup if the latter managed to slay the Bird of War in battle—a trade my predecessor failed to deliver on. Amoxtli had secretly supported Nochtli’s coup. The man was getting on his years, but the Nightlords had refused him the kiss of immortality. Being denied the opportunity to recapture his vigorous youth had left him bitter and resentful toward the empire’s undead masters. Nochtli never fully trusted him, since he was liable to turn his cloak if the vampires changed their minds, but he could make a powerful ally if well-cajoled. Finally, Cuauhteztli was neither a schemer nor a brute, but an earnest man who followed his duties. Though his order worshiped the Bird of War, he was equally dedicated to following the current emperor’s orders. His loyalty between his distant god and his yearly commander-in-chief had yet to be tested. I’m not going to run a military coup with these four anytime soon. But I can lay the groundwork. And for that, I need to start with a good impression. “Tezozomoc informed me that each of you leads our nation’s elite military orders,” I said respectfully. The four men nodded. “It pleases me to have mighty warriors at my side. You may sit.” By now, playing the authoritative emperor came… I wouldn’t say naturally, but easily enough. Facing the Underworld’s dangers and the Nightlords’ madness had burned away what little fear I may have had of my fellow man. The key was to act like King Mictlantecuhtli—to speak with the voice of an ancient mountain who stood above mortal concerns. A god who didn’t expect to be obeyed but knew others would bow before his power and wisdom. My advisors all sat around me, with Tezozomoc and Chikal each taking a place at my side. I ordered Necahual to serve them drinks “Though we have restrained the treacherous Sapa ambassadors, it is only a matter of time before word of their plot’s failure reaches their superiors,” I declared. In all likelihood, the Mallquis had already warned his fellows. “I wish to strike them as soon as the New Fire Ceremony concludes, before they have time to organize. How many men can we mobilize within that timeframe?” This question was a ploy. Chikal had already given me a rundown of the empire’s military forces yesterday, so I knew exactly how many soldiers I could call upon in the short and long term. My goal was to gauge my generals’ personalities and see which of them had fire in their veins and who preferred caution to bravery. “The four fraternities always stand ready to march at any time, Your Majesty,” Coaxoch answered immediately. “Ten xiquipilli platoons protect the capital’s region too. If the goddesses smile on us, Your Majesty may lead a hundred thousand men on the new year’s dawn.” “Our Lord Emperor may not need such a force,” Amoxtli argued with calmer demeanor. “Fifty thousand other soldiers currently man our southern frontier. While their standing orders are to keep the border free of invaders, they can move into Sapa territory at any time.” Patli snorted. “Fifty thousand men spread across leagues upon leagues of jungles and mountains won’t go far, Amoxtli. They can raid the frontier, but not expand it.” “Do we truly need a decisive push?” Amoxtli wondered. He turned his head in my direction while carefully avoiding my gaze. “What are your objectives for this campaign, Lord Emperor?” “My goal, as ordained by the heavens, is the complete and utter subjugation of the entire Sapa Empire.” A short silence followed my bold declaration, which I swiftly broke. “Though the goddesses might claim my heart before I see this day, it is up to me to lay the foundations for this great victory.” “A tall order,” Amoxtli commented with slight skepticism. “A glorious order,” Coaxoch replied with more enthusiasm. “The mountain people will make for fine sacrifices.” Patli nodded sharply. “If the goddesses command it, it shall be done.” Only one of the four had yet to speak. Cuauhteztli kept his arms crossed, with his mind in deep meditation. As he was the youngest of the generals present and represented the least prestigious of the main fraternities, I wondered if he preferred to let his colleagues take the lead. That, or he remained cautious. I forced him out of his comfort zone. “What is your opinion, Cuauhteztli?” The eagle warrior cleared his threat. “Oh great lord, would you allow me to suggest an alternative?” When I offered him a sharp nod, the man gained a bit more confidence. “Why not challenge the Sapa Empire to a series of Flower Wars?” Flower Wars? My thoughts briefly wandered to Yoloxochitl’s garden until I remembered where I had heard the term before. Flower Wars were an archaic form of warfare where enemies agreed to meet in battle at a preselected place and time. Soldiers would wage duels not to kill but to capture their foes, usually for the purpose of human sacrifices. The Nightlords invented the practice after a terrible famine slew so many soldiers that a conventional war against neighboring countries had become infeasible in the short term. “What purpose would it serve?” I asked, slightly confused. “We will not conquer the Sapa Empire in a year,” Cuauhteztli said. “Their mountains form a natural fortress. To win, we must destroy their spirits by showcasing our martial prowess. The Sapa will have no choice but to accept the conflict or appear as cowards.” Amoxtli quickly voiced his support. “I agree with the proposal. Our numbers dwarf those of the Sapa people. Losses in manpower will affect them more sharply than us. Hence, our best bet is to bleed them out of their best warriors, then make a decisive push. This strategy worked against the Yucan Empire.” “After sixty years of attrition,” Tezozomoc pointed out. “While the Sapa Empire would likely agree to this proposal to avoid a conventional war, I doubt the goddess will accept such half-measures.” “Flower Wars will bring honor to a few and blood for the goddesses, but our soldiers fight for spoils,” Coaxoch grunted in disdain. “For gold, for land, for women. We can only earn those by marching on cities.” “And how do you suggest we do that?” Amoxtli argued. “Not only are their cities well-fortified; but as Cuauhteztli pointed out so keenly, the mountains will make any progress long and untenable.” “The mountains will not protect the Sapa from the children of the night,” I said, many eyes turning at me. “The goddesses will send their spawn to fight with us.” “If so, then victory is assured,” Patli said with a grim, terrifying smile. Amoxtli did not stand down. “Even so, we need soldiers to hold these cities. Our logistics⁠—” “Our men can feed themselves in the field,” Coaxoch interrupted him in his anger. “All I hear are excuses to justify your cowardice. Have the Jaguar Knights turned into ocelots while I wasn’t looking? My Shorn Ones will take those mountains alone if that’s what it takes!” A flash of fury passed over Amoxtli’s face, though he kept it under control. “The Shorn Ones might be excellent at taking positions, but keeping and defending them are a whole other matter.” “The goddesses wouldn’t have authorized this war if they weren’t confident in our inevitable success,” Patli argued. “If the Sapa prove difficult to convert, then we will decimate their cities. That way, we will have fewer mouths to feed.” Cuauhteztli hesitated a moment, as if unsure if he should interrupt the argument, before powering through. “This would foster resentment,” he correctly pointed out. “Once word comes out, other cities will fight to the death.” Coaxoch smirked ear to ear. “And how would that be a bad thing? There is no glory in fighting cowards.” “You Shorn Ones can only think of battle,” Amoxtli said with scorn. “His Majesty’s goal is not to exterminate but to subjugate.” “And our emperor will be long dead before the latter happens if he follows your cowardly ways,” Coaxoch rebuked him. Patli nodded in support. “The goddesses prophesied that Emperor Iztac would usher in an age of glory,” he said. “The heavens favor the bold.” Destroying your masters will undoubtedly be my most glorious moment. As I thought that, my fingers were trembling in annoyance. I gleaned quite a few important details from this argument. First of all, the jabs between Coaxoch and Amoxtli implied that the military fraternities did not always get along. Although they fought as part of the same army, they were rivals. Maybe I could exploit these tensions in the long run. Moreover, while they were no doubt all excellent warriors, these four appeared relatively single-minded. None of them suggested exploiting the divisions among the Sapa Empire, unlike Chikal beforehand, nor exploiting our superior naval power to launch a surprise attack. I supposed it made sense. Yohuachanca’s warlords and generals never truly commanded the army. They always answered to a higher authority, that of the emperor, his war consort, or the Nightlords. They had been bred for strength and discipline, not creativity. That, and it had been many decades since Yohuachanca confronted a foe it could not simply browbeat to submission through mere numbers and military superiority. They lack imagination. I glanced at Chikal. Unlike someone else in the room. My consort hadn’t spoken a word yet and, in fact, hardly seemed to pay attention to the soldiers’ dispute. Her amber eyes instead gazed at me with that same blank, unreadable look I had come to expect from her. Just as I was gauging the soldiers, she was doing the same with me. I smiled at her, genuinely amused by her caution. To my surprise, Chikal swiftly returned the gesture and then focused her attention back on my generals. I had the feeling she had somehow reached a certain conclusion about my person… though I couldn’t tell which one yet. “Enough,” I said. The argument came to a screeching halt. I briefly basked in the silence, waiting for my council to focus on my words, and then spoke up again. “I have reached a decision.” I could not settle on a standard Flower War. Not only would it hardly bleed the Nightlords’ forces, but it would result in a long conflict of attrition rather than the destructive disaster I aimed for. However, I needed to impress my warriors if I were to earn their loyalty. Much like a Flower War was meant to showcase the empire’s strength to conquered people, it was an opportunity for an emperor to demonstrate his prowess. I could not let the opportunity pass. Hence, I decided to have my tortilla and eat it too. “My consort, Chikal, proposed a bold strategy,” I explained. “To strike the Sapa Empire through their soft underbelly, the sea. We shall gather a great army, take their ports by storm under the Nightkin’s protection, and establish a foothold. Meanwhile, we will lure the Sapa’s eyes elsewhere.” Amoxtli scowled. “How so, Your Majesty?” “We shall offer them a Flower War to a place of our choosing to the southeast,” I said. “We will invite their best warriors to fight our own and defeat them honorably… while at the same time, the rest of our forces will strike their homeland in the back through the western sea.” Of course, I would find a way to leak information about the naval attack to the Sapa Empire. The Nightlords would find no smooth sailing on my watch. “It is a bold plan, Your Divine Majesty,” Tezozomoc said, though I sensed the doubt in his voice. “But, if you forgive my worries… how can you be sure the Sapa Empire will accept the challenge and send their best troops?” “Simple.” I smiled from ear to ear. “Because I will lead our side in person.” And with luck, I might lure the Mallquis out of hiding. The war council ended up being more productive than expected. Everyone approved my plan—or if they had doubts, they kept them to themselves—and promised to carry it through. The military brotherhoods would already start to mobilize ahead of the meeting with the empire’s other generals, which would probably take place after the New Fire Ceremony and right before the official declaration of war. For my part, I had already detected hints of rivalries between the warrior brotherhoods. I smelled blood in the water. Cracks to exploit. I needed to assess which groups might potentially support my efforts against the Nightlords and those that required elimination. For now, Chikal agreed to run a sparring session to train me for the upcoming false Flower War. My palace possessed a private training yard near the garden, which was mostly used by guards in need of a workout. I had the feeling my new, silent escorts wouldn’t require as much upkeep to stay in shape. Instead, Chikal and the Amazons I had added to my consorts’ protection detail had requisitioned the terrain for themselves. They had been spared from the Nightlords’ purge, though unfortunately not by virtue of their merit. While I allowed them to bear weapons, they were still officially nothing more than concubines and bed slaves. A status that many of the Amazons resented, if I could trust the glares they sent me behind my back. “Before I can help you sharpen your skills, Lord Emperor, I must see where you stand as a warrior,” Chikal declared as Necahual and other servants clothed me in traditional war clothes—splendid, gilded cotton armor adorned with blue quetzal feathers and supplemented with leather strips to protect my legs. “A true warrior understands his strengths and weaknesses.” I draw a blank at the former. I had always been deemed a failure of a warrior at school since I lacked the strength, stature, and endurance for battle. At best, I was slightly quicker than most, but not enough to dominate an opponent. A career as a lowly porter was all I could have hoped for in the military. Especially since I cannot use my magic in public. The wind whispered encouragement into my ear, “Only on the final nights will owls and bats dance in the sky.” They couldn’t come soon enough. “I would like to see your endurance, Lord Emperor.” Chikal ordered some of her Amazons to give me a carrying frame filled to the brim with bags of stones. “Can you run around the yard five times?” I doubted I would survive one. Or at least that was what I believed until I put the carrying frame on my back. To my surprise, it didn’t seem so heavy. In fact, I felt light. “Are the stones hollow?” I asked in confusion. Chikal chuckled back in sincere amusement. “If you say that, Lord Emperor, then we haven’t put in enough of them.” My consort had the Amazons increase my burden with more bags. The carrying frame finally started to weigh on me, though not as much as I expected. I started to race around the yard, expecting to pant within five steps. I did not fall. I did not slow down to catch my breath. I did not stumble under the weight on my back. I did not tire out. My back remained straight and unbroken. I completed a lap, then another. By the time I carried on to my third lap, Tezozomoc and a few of the Amazons did not hide their fascination. Some of the latter had been glaring at me not too long ago, and now it seemed I had earned a sliver of respect. Most telling was Necahual’s reaction. My mother-in-law understood my limits perfectly. After all, she contributed to them by denying me any meat. And here she stood on the sidelines, staring at me with a spooked expression. She struggled to believe her own eyes. It can’t be thanks to better food alone. I completed my fourth lap, despite having suffered from malnourishment just a week earlier. I couldn’t have caught up to experienced warriors in such a short time. It’s unusual. No. Not unusual. Unnatural. “A heart of flames burns brighter than flesh,” the wind whispered. “One day, it shall turn thy bones to ashes.” My Teyolia had strengthened my body. Consuming the Fourth Sun’s embers had done more than reinforce my magic and fill my veins with divine fire. It infused my muscles with greater vitality. It made sense to me. I was walking the path of godhood. If I kept consuming the ashes of dead suns, I would soon grow stronger than any man. Which was bound to become noticeable. Should I slow down? For now, I hadn’t done anything truly spectacular. I wasn’t running faster than the wind or carrying a boulder with one hand. I was simply performing better than expected at a physical exercise. There could be many explanations for it. Better food, more confidence, the fact that the Nightlords’ magic had brought me back from the dead at least once and restored my stabbed heart… I looked at Chikal. My consort was testing me as much as I assessed her. I knew she expected more from this exercise than just gauging my endurance. I had a hard time figuring out what the Amazon queen thought, since she revealed very little of herself whether in words or actions, but I had noticed her smiling at me more often. My unexpected stamina appeared to please her. “Strong men make for better tools,” the wind whispered. “For all men are fools in a woman’s hands.” Did Chikal think she could exchange favors for favors, as Lady Sigrun had before her? Or perhaps the wind was taunting me in the hopes that I would give in to my curiosity and trade more secrets with it. In the end, I decided not to overdo it. I slowed down upon completing my fifth revolution around the yard and pretended to catch my breath, though I could have easily run ten more. “Impressive display, Lord Emperor,” Chikal complimented me. She whistled, and Amazons tossed a wooden training stick to us both. “Will you allow me the honor of a spar?” “If you wish, Chikal.” The stick felt as light as a feather in my hand. “It’s about time we stop dancing around each other, don’t you think?” Chikal’s smile turned almost predatory. “I agree.” She charged at me without warning, closing the gap between us in an instant. She flung her weapon at my throat before I could even answer. I barely had time to raise my weapon and parry the blow, the strike sending aftershocks traveling through my arms. Chikal was quick. Quicker than the monster I’d fought in the Underworld and far stronger than I expected. I could feel the weight of her tightly sculpted muscles when our sticks clashed. Moreover, an invisible pressure radiated off her. Her amber eyes had dilated like those of a jaguar on the hunt. Everything in her body language, from her expression to subtle shifts in posture, screamed danger. It was all the more startling when compared to the calm control she had shown beforehand. It was as if a wild beast had suddenly broken free of its leash. It was a show. A practiced tactic to throw enemy warriors off their game. It might have worked on another man who had never seen battle, never tussled with death. But I did far more than that. I stared into the face of death and impressed it enough to grant me power. So I pushed back with all my might. Chikal proved stronger than me, so she did not fall back, though I stood my ground nonetheless. A small success. “I haven’t taken off the carrying frame yet!” I complained. Chikal answered with another strike that sent me reeling. The weight I carried nearly threatened to send me tumbling to the ground. “Do you expect your foes to wait for their turn, Lord Emperor?” I gritted my teeth and conceded her point. Still, that applied to both of us, so I could also fight dirty. I lowered my stick, grazed the ground, and threw a volley of dirt at her face. Chikal covered her eyes with a smile, which gave me just enough time to throw the carrying frame off my back. Then I charged with all my strength and speed. Our sticks clashed and cracked with each impact and parry. Tezozomoc, Necahual, my guards… they no longer existed. Keeping Chikal’s weapon away from my throat demanded all of my attention. Conflicting thoughts crossed my mind. Should I try to overwhelm her with all I have? Should I focus on tiring her out? Should I circle around her? All the lessons I had learned at school blurred inside my skull. Which advice should I trust? Worse, the rush of battle started to awaken my slumbering Tonalli. I felt the owl in me threaten to lash out on instinct. I struggled not to manifest shadowy talons and tear her to shreds. The beast inside me wished nothing more than to come out and kill. Chikal’s smile faded away, replaced with a scowl of pure anger. I saw her. I finally saw her. The real Chikal. The fearsome warrior queen, who had hidden in plain sight under a blank mask of caution. A wild jaguar who relished the thrill of battle. The same bloodlust that motivated Coaxoch coursed through her veins… but she did not let it control her actions. She had tamed her appetite for violence, mastered it, and refined it. She wielded her wrath like a blade, unsheathing it when needed but never letting it interfere with her self-interest. Her furious look faded away in an instant, like a morning mirage. Her facade of self-control returned, partly. She couldn’t hide the anger in her gaze. Somehow, I had insulted her. Our playtime ended with her kicking my ankle so hard that I collapsed. I bit my tongue so as not to scream. If I hadn’t consumed the Fourth Sun’s embers, the blow would have shattered my femur; even the leather straps around my leg failed to soften the blow. She pinned me to the ground with one hand, a knee on my arm, and her stick against my throat. Never before had I felt the difference between a true warrior and an amateur so keenly. I never stood a chance. Not even with weapons. And yet, when her eyes met mine, I could only see frustration within them. “You are holding back,” Chikal accused me with a venomous tone. “Do you mean to insult me?” I didn't mean to disrespect her, but she was right. I was holding back. My Tonalli raged within my chest, struggling to come out and defend me even when I wanted it to stay quiet. By dividing my attention between our clash and suppressing the true power within me, I had insulted Chikal’s pride as a warrior. I noticed my guards taking a step closer at the edge of my gaze. I stopped them with a wave of my free hand. Chikal did not even glance at them. “You win,” I conceded. If our sticks had been made of obsidian rather than wood, Chikal would have gutted me on the spot. “Among my people, there is no greater insult than going easy on a fellow warrior,” she said with a cold, dead voice. “Do you think me beneath your concern, oh Lord Emperor?” The title had a mocking edge to it. I suddenly realized that it had always been a hidden insult in her mind. A way to say she didn’t owe me any respect beyond those afforded to me by my station. That she respected the emperor’s office, the way the conquered had to bow before their conqueror, and not the man occupying it. “No,” I replied, coldly. I supposed I could drop the mask too. We were finally having a heart to heart. “But I have greater concerns.” “You want to hide your true skills from them.” Chikal’s eyes squinted. “You planned it.” I tried to play the fool. “What are you…” Chikal pushed her weapon closer to my throat, enough that I struggled a bit to breathe. She leaned in closer to my face, so close that I felt her breath on my lips. “The assassination attempt,” she whispered into my ear. “You set it up somehow. You have been looking for a pretext to start this war since the moment we met, so tell me…” Chikal’s smile radiated malice. “Why shouldn’t I turn you in, Iztac?” part0026. 21DANGEROUS WOMEN Ithought over Chikal’s words with unblinking eyes and then answered, “Go ahead.” Chikal applied more pressure, her expression once more a blank mask that let none of her true emotions shine through. While she considered my answer, I glanced briefly at our audience. Tezozomoc and the others were far away enough that they wouldn't understand us if we kept our voices low, but we were in the open. I couldn’t use the Veil without also affecting Chikal, not to mention the risks of discovery and the wind… The wind. “Let our secrets go unheard,” I muttered under my breath, “and I shall feed you well tonight.” A breeze suddenly blew in my face, drowning my breath with its whistle. The Yaotzin had accepted the covenant… or so I hoped. Chikal frowned at me. “What did you⁠—” “Go ahead,” I repeated, keeping my voice as low as possible. Just in case. “Accuse me without any proof. See if the Nightlords believe you. See if they care. They want this war as much as I do.” “Then why did that half-man Tlacaelel so fervently try to dissuade you?” Chikal glared at me. At least she had the decency to lower her tone enough that I struggled to hear her myself. “How convenient that he perished on your assassination attempt’s eve too…” “Is it my fault he couldn’t tell up from down?” I shrugged. “Your efforts will be for naught.” I was bluffing, of course. I doubted the Nightlords would believe Chikal, but it might increase their suspicions and make my work unfathomably more difficult. I needed to remain beneath notice as much as possible. “All you will succeed in doing is making an enemy of me,” I said. That much was true. “And you don’t want that.” “I see you fight better with words than with weapons,” Chikal replied with scorn. “Both pale before what the Nightlords can do to the two of us.” “So you will sell me out to them the way you treacherously betrayed your sister city of Balam?” Chikal visibly flinched at my words, her confidence briefly shaken. I smiled and pushed my advantage. “How did that work out for you? Oh yes, your loyalty was repaid with a forced marriage, an eventual sacrifice, and your people’s enslavement.” Chikal’s grip on her training stick tightened so much that the wood cracked under the pressure. “You know nothing, male.” She made the last word sound like an insult, which it probably was for her people. “I did what I had to do as queen of Chilam to protect my people. The Nightlords would have exterminated us otherwise.” I had reached the root of the problem. Fear. She feared the Nightlords more than anything. Would her hatred of them prove stronger, I wondered? “You too fight better with words than weapons then,” I mocked her back. “I didn’t take Amazons for cowards, let alone their queen.” Chikal’s eyes flared with anger. “You forget your place, puppet emperor.” “No, queen of nothing, you have.” I held her gaze with contempt. “The Nightlords might pull my strings, but I still possess more power than you ever will.” “When weak, project strength,” the breeze whispered. “When strong, hide it.” If she wanted to threaten me, then the two of us could play the same game. “If you try anything against me, I will have your people wiped out from the face of this earth,” I warned her. “The Nightlords asked me to gather ten thousand tributes in a few months’ time. A word from me, a single word, and your city will pay that price. Soldiers will raze it to the ground, vampires will feast on its people, and the priests will erase it from history. Chilam will never have existed.” Chikal became livid, her anger and contempt briefly replaced with a hint of fear. “You wouldn’t dare…” I scoffed, “I’ve started a war with a million-strong empire, but you think I will hesitate to slay a few thousand lives? Do you think the Nightlords would hesitate? They don't care where the blood comes from, so long as it flows.” “You will never have the chance,” Chikal replied with a scowl. “A single strike from me, right now, and your life comes to an end.” “Do your worst,” I replied, calmly calling her bluff. “I stabbed my own heart on the very first day of my tenure in an act of defiance, and the Nightlords still brought me back. You will fail to put me in the ground, and you will pay the price for your foolishness.” Chikal said nothing as she observed me closely. I knew my words had hit her right in the heart. The fact she hadn’t yet delivered a killing blow was proof enough of it. “You are not lying,” she said. Was that a hint of respect I detected in her voice? “You truly did try to spite them on your first day…” “I did,” I confirmed. “You think currying favor with the Nightlords will make them grateful to you, or you hold hope servitude will ease your people’s burden? You’re wrong. Vampires feel no gratitude, only hunger. They devour the loyal and the treacherous alike. They do not deserve our adoration, let alone our respect.” Yoloxochitl had massacred loyal guards in a fit of madness, and her sisters did not even comment about Tlacaelel’s death, even after he served them all his life. “We agree on the last part, at least,” Chikal conceded. “And yet, here we are.” “For now,” I replied evasively, my eyes wandering to Tezozomoc and the guards. “Let me go now, before they grow suspicious.” After a short silence, Chikal released her weapon’s hold on my throat, rose back to her feet… and offered me her hand to rise up again. I accepted it. Her grip was strong, almost enough to crush my hand. “You fought well, Lord Emperor, but your defense is lacking,” Chikal declared loudly, albeit more for the sake of our audience than mine. “We shall assess your footwork and shield work next.” “As you wish.” I hesitated a moment as she stepped away before calling her by name. “Chikal.” The Amazon queen looked over her shoulder, her face once again unreadable. “I could have easily sacrificed your city to the Nightlords and called it a day,” I pointed out. “Consider why I did not.” Chikal nodded sharply, then barked out orders. A minute later, Tezozomoc helped me trade my stick for a rounded wood shield reinforced with deer skin and feathers. “While it is not my place to question Your Imperial Majesty…” My advisor cleared his throat. “Is there something wrong with Lady Chikal? I was starting to worry for your safety.” It took all my resolve and self-control to hide my fear under a mask of serene boredom. “What did you overhear?” I prayed he hadn’t heard much. If he had overheard anything sensitive… I would have to kill him swiftly. Yet another assassination would carry tremendous risks of discovery, even if successful. “Not much, the wind being strong as it is,” Tezozomoc replied. “But if I understood correctly… you threatened to have her home pay the goddesses’ tribute.” “Whether above or below, the salted seas are made of tears,” the wind taunted me. Of course. They didn’t call the fickle Yaotzin the enemy of both sides for nothing. The treacherous wind had let just enough information slip away to foster discord without implicating me directly. “I put her in her place,” I replied bluntly, which was technically true. “Chikal still thinks of herself as an Amazon queen. Serving a man does not come easily to her.” “Ah, of course. I had feared something like this would happen. Her empty pride cannot stand that Your Majesty overshadows her.” Tezozomoc nodded to himself. “If I may, why did Your Imperial Majesty simply whisper threats instead of uttering them out loud. No one will blame you for chastising your consort in public.” Damn it, he had grown a little suspicious. “Have you met Mother Yoloxochitl?” “I’ve had the pleasure, yes. She loves Your Divine Majesty like a son.” “Like all good mothers, she is protective of her adopted children.” The very sentence left a bitter taste in my throat. “If word of this reaches her… I fear she will worry too much and punish Chikal severely when a private remark would make her come around just as well.” Tezozomoc glanced at my new guards. He knew all too well what had happened to their predecessors. “Understandable,” he said. “Though I believe your concerns are unwarranted. Lady Chikal is under Lady Sugey’s protection. The sisters do not wage war on one another.” “I hope the goddesses are wiser than us men,” I lied through my teeth. “But nonetheless, I would rather that this matter stayed between us. We can hardly afford division for now.” “As Your Majesty wishes.” Tezozomoc did not insist any further and vacated the field as we started a new training drill. Three Amazons armed with sticks attacked me from all sides while Chikal watched from afar. Their interaction proved enlightening. Chikal was… well, still a warrior-queen at heart. The way the Amazons looked at me differently after I showcased better physical prowess than expected spoke volumes about their culture. They respected strength and despised weakness. I wondered how much of this bout had been a genuine attempt at intimidation, or Chikal just testing the waters. Either way, standing my ground had been the right decision. My words might have been harsh, but they garnered some respect. But would it be enough to make my consort an ally? A blow against my shield forced me back to reality. The Amazon guards attacked me from all sides, aiming for my legs and arms. I felt like I was training at school once again, playing the warrior under the watchful red eyes of the priests. While I always proved mediocre at drills, the lessons still stuck. I remembered the footwork exercises, the physical punishment when I failed to hold a shield correctly, and the thousand words of advice on how to properly stand one’s ground when faced with enemies. And the power I had gained from the Fourth Sun’s embers had finally granted me the strength to carry them through. Still, I had simply moved from mediocre to average. I managed to hold my ground against the warriors, parrying their blows and even bashing one away with my shield. However, keeping my Tonalli restrained proved to be an equal struggle. The owl within me simply couldn’t tell the difference between a mock fight and a real one. It was… distracting. My opponents’ speed and teamwork eventually proved too much. While I blocked a blow with my shield from one warrior and avoided a strike from another, the third snuck behind me and hit me in the back. The blow hurt a bit. “If that had been an obsidian club, Lord Emperor, you would be dead,” Chikal pointed out to me. “Try again.” We repeated this exercise three more times, each one becoming easier than the previous one. I learned quickly. I stayed on the move to avoid being cornered or flanked; I bashed faces with my shield whenever I found an opening; and I parried and deflected and dodged when able. It isn’t just my body. My reflexes have sharpened too. I reacted quicker, learned quicker. I did not tire either. No matter how hard the Amazons tried to rush me, no matter how many blows I blocked or dodged, no soreness seized my muscles. I could have fought on forever. “The newborn sun grows brighter,” the wind echoed in the distance. “Until one day, it shall shed its mortal coil and set the night ablaze.” After the fourth bout, I pretended to stop to catch my breath so as not to arouse suspicion. While most of my audience appeared more impressed than anything, Tezozomoc among them, neither Necahual nor Chikal were fooled. The former tended to my bruises with ointments and a clenched jaw, as if biting her own tongue; the latter observed me with crossed arms, mulling over my performance. “What a splendid bout, Your Imperial Majesty,” Tezozomoc complimented me as he gave me a waterskin. “You possess a true champion’s potential.” “I still have much to learn,” I replied in between sips. Chikal had crushed me easily on this earth, and a monster had nearly murdered me in the Underworld. I had taken the first steps on the path, but the road to strength was a long one indeed. “I need more practice.” “Even mighty jaguars are born small,” Tezozomoc reassured me. “It takes time to sharpen one’s teeth.” “And we have so little of it,” Chikal pointed out. “We shall now practice hand-to-hand combat, Lord Emperor.” “Three on one again?” I asked, my fellow sparring partners being as exhausted as I pretended to be. Chikal shook her head. “I shall be your opponent.” I held her gaze, returned the waterskin to Tezozomoc, and then tossed my shield and stick aside. Our helpers emptied the training ground while my consort and I faced each other. We both adopted a standard fighting stance, hands raised into fists. We circled each other in silence, looking for an opening. Chikal jumped at me without warning. I attempted to intercept her with a punch, but she deftly moved out of my arm’s way, grabbed it, and pulled me closer. Not having expected such a bold move, I struggled not to stumble onto the ground. Before I knew what hit me, Chikal had moved behind my back, put an arm around my neck, and choked me with her elbow. I clawed at her flesh with my nails, but since she was both stronger and taller than me, she managed to lift me above the ground. I struggled to breathe, my feet dangling in the air. “Why?” Chikal whispered in my ear while loosening her grip. “Why did you decide to attack the Sapa Empire instead of an easier target? For gold and glory?” “For a throne of bones and a crown of blood,” the wind said. “For the sake of chaos,” I coughed back. Damn it, her strength matched that of a coiling snake. Even Tezozomoc appeared a bit worried. He probably thought Chikal meant to rough me up and was whispering taunts into my ear. “You want to weaken the Nightlords’ regime from within…” Chikal realized. “You are a fool if you think they can be defeated. A brave fool, but a fool nonetheless. Resistance is futile.” “Did your people not kill Nightkin by dragging them into the sun?” I grunted. “We did.” A thin smile formed at the edge of Chikal’s lips. “I did.” “Then we can, no, should fight back.” To prove my words, I stepped to the right, pulling all my weight against Chikal’s arm. This sudden movement loosened her hold enough for me to kick her in between her legs. Chikal coughed in pain and released her hold. “Better that than to languish in servitude until our usefulness comes to an end.” My escape was short-lived. Chikal grabbed my right arm, pulled it behind my back, and then threw me to the ground. I crashed head-first into the dirt while my consort pinned me to the ground, her body leaning against me as if to welcome me in a carnal embrace. “The spawn are mortal, but their creators are not,” she whispered into my ear, her voice now lacking in confidence. “I have seen her in action, the Bird of War. I bore witness to her true self. A feathered beast strong enough to grind stone to dust and cleave a warrior in half with a single blow.” An experience that shook her as much as witnessing Yoloxochitl’s true self had shaken me. “I have seen what the Flower of the Heart hides beneath her pristine skin,” I replied, unblinking. “So yes, they’re strong… and yet so weak that they must crawl away from the rising sun.” Chikal let out a chuckle. “I too desired nothing more than to fight and die on my feet, Iztac.” Iztac? Not Lord Emperor? “Martyrs garner admiration,” the wind whispered in my ear. “Even when their message goes unheard.” “But my loyalty to my sisters in Chilam proved greater. When I realized resistance meant extermination, I swallowed my pride for my kin’s sake. Such is a queen’s duty. I will do anything to ensure my people’s safety.” “Then we should work together,” I argued. “We both have a year to live, and once you are gone, your city will lose what little protection you can provide. So long as your people live under the Nightlords’ yoke, they are one word away from being slaughtered.” Chikal leaned in closer, her breasts against my back, her lips against my ear. “Can you free Chilam, Iztac?” My jaw clenched on its own. “Not yet.” “Not yet, not ever.” “Not yet,” I insisted with confidence. “And until that day comes, I can make your people’s lives easier. I can exempt Chilam from war requirements or tributes. We have more to gain from cooperating than fighting each other.” Chikal held her breath. I turned my head slightly to better look at her face. She mulled over my words, briefly considered giving in to the light of hope… and then morosely smothered it. “I shall not help you plot against the Nightlords,” Chikal decided sternly. As I had feared. Much like Lady Sigrun, she had come to believe in the false goddesses’ aura of invincibility. I couldn’t risk revealing my powers to sway her either, not until she had earned my complete and utter trust. “But I shall not betray you to them either,” Chikal added, leaving the door open. “If you prevail by some miracle, it will serve Chilam’s interests. Until then, I will look the other way.” She would serve me as a loyal consort and advisor but would not exceed her duties. Saddening. At least I had talked her out of becoming an enemy, and I still saw the potential to make her a friend. “If one of the Nightlords were to perish,” I started, “would you change your tune?” Chikal nearly scoffed, swallowed her doubts to consider the situation rationally, and then let out a shrug. “Most likely.” “Good,” I replied. “I shall remember it.” Then I suddenly headbutted her in the nose. I felt something moist and warm on my hair—blood most likely. Chikal didn’t expect it, nor did she prepare for the elbow strike I delivered to her chest. I managed to throw her off my back with savage resistance, then kicked dust in her face. It gave me enough time to jump back to my feet. Tezozomoc, who had looked ready to separate us by force, cracked an amused smile. Chikal did not hurry up. She calmly wiped the dust off her face, rose back up, and faced me. “Clever boy,” she said with a thin smile. “Sweet talking me into lowering my guard.” “Victory excuses everything,” I replied while returning her smile. “I hope you found my performance suitable.” Chikal’s smile quickly faded away. “You have good instincts and passable physical aptitude, but little to no technique. I request at least two hours of daily drills.” “Granted.” I turned to Tezozomoc. “Find a place in my schedule where I can fit them in.” “As you wish, Your Imperial Majesty.” Tezozomoc bowed slightly. “If I may, we should proceed with interrogating the Sapa ambassadors while we still have time. The goddesses will request your presence at sundown for the New Fire Ceremony.” An event I did not look forward to. “Do not forget our covenant,” the wind warned me. “A traitor's wages are paid in suffering.” Tonight would be a busy time. “I must take my leave,” I informed Chikal. “I expect you to prepare the generals’ assembly in my absence.” “Of course, Iztac,” my consort replied with a short, respectful bow. “Iztac?” I raised an eyebrow. “Not Lord Emperor?” “I can use both if you prefer.” Chikal put a hand on her waist, her cold eyes appraising me with what could pass for appreciation. “I admit I’m pleasantly surprised. I feared you would prove a weakling, but you have fire in your veins.” My heart skipped a beat, though I managed to keep a straight face. If only she knew… Interrogating the Sapa ambassadors proved to be a different challenge than I expected. When I walked into their cells and found myself welcomed with the nauseating stench of blood and charred flesh, I immediately realized how the red-eyed priests had intended to extract confessions from their prisoners. What I had seen then… those terrifying stone wheels and bone spikes and sharp metal pyramids dripping blood… I would rather forget. The ambassadors—truthfully—proclaimed their innocence, but their pleas had gone unheard. Yoloxochitl’s cruelty paled compared to the sublimely nauseating horrors her servants inflicted on our prisoners. And worst of all, the priests didn’t even take joy in the torture. I had watched the torturers’ reactions almost as acutely as those of the prisoners. If they had shown a perverse enjoyment in their craft… I would still have hated them, but at least I would have understood it. But these people showed neither cruelty nor remorse. They carved men open with blank faces and unblinking red eyes, their hands swinging blades with the steadiness of veteran butchers. Inflicting pain was no more than a job for the priests. A task they had long grown indifferent to. The Nightlords had managed to make the worst evils banal. These animals… These animals don’t deserve a quick death. I was on my way out of this den of terror, my thoughts too weak to drown out the screams. One day… they shall share their victims’ suffering. I swear it. Though the extracted confessions proved of little value, the priests did provide potentially helpful information. The stones used to carve the Chaskarumi tablet came from the city of Paitili in the Antisuyu region of the Sapa Empire—a place with walls made of the purest gold, protected by mountains on one side and rainforests on the other. The local Apu was called Inkarri… and that was all the ambassadors could tell me. The man—they believed him to be a man—had founded the city over a century ago, bequeathing his name and title to his descendants. Our prisoners believed the current Apu was some great-grandchild of the original, though they never met him in person. How odd. How suspicious. At least I had a lead, meager as it was. “I am truly sorry that Your Imperial Majesty had to see this,” Tezozomoc apologized as we exited the dungeons. Necahual and other servants awaited us outside; I had spared her a few more nightmares. “We tried less intrusive methods at first but failed to make progress.” Of course you failed. Their blood was on my hands alone. “Death would have been kinder than what I saw today, Tezozomoc.” “It would have been,” my advisor conceded. “But the heavens do not forgive the earth’s slights against them.” A long-winded way to say the ambassadors deserved a hundred torments for daring to strike a living god. Though he was a more tolerable advisor than Tlacaelel, this moment starkly reminded me that Tezozomoc remained a red-eyed priest first and foremost. His sincere fanaticism simply allowed him to justify the most horrendous of crimes. And I can’t even scold him for it without arousing suspicion. I had to feign vengefulness to sell my lie. The best I could do was argue against these shameful tortures on practical grounds. “I doubt we will extract much from them,” I warned Tezozomoc. “Whoever ordered me dead clearly did not trust these fools with important information.” “I’m afraid so,” my advisor replied. “We have mobilized our spies in the Sapa Empire and are awaiting reports from them. If the Inkarri Apu had ensorcelled the cursed tablet, we shall confirm it with haste.” “We employ spies among those savages?” If I could give this information to the Sapa Empire’s leadership, all the better. “Quite a few, Your Imperial Majesty. While infiltrating the Sapa Emperor’s court has proved difficult, we have penetrated their bureaucracy and political establishment. Lady Ingrid will probably tell you more. She is meant to oversee matters of foreign diplomacy, including our nation’s foreign network.” “Send her to my bedchambers tonight,” I declared. “This matter cannot wait.” “As you wish.” Tezozomoc coughed, as if suddenly remembering a trivial matter. “While it pales before the events at hand, Xochipilli’s sons still await an audience with Your Imperial Majesty.” “I have not forgotten them.” They had simply slipped out of my mind. “Call them over now. There is still an hour before twilight.” Tezozomoc coughed in embarrassment. “Your Imperial Majesty, if I may, the New Fire Ceremony demands a ritual cleansing…” “Then summon them to my baths,” I mused with a shrug. “If those two are wise, they will not waste their emperor’s time while he washes.” Tezozomoc hid his sigh behind a deep bow. “As Your Imperial Majesty wishes it.” “Call Lady Sigrun too,” I ordered. I had promised to inform her which of those two I would select so that she might receive a bribe and strengthen her influence. “She will help clean me.” A few minutes later, Necahual was helping me undress in the palace’s bathhouse. The complex, as large as a small district, was a study in opulence. A marble pool vaster than a ballgame court sprang up at its center, surrounded by exquisite fountains and smaller baths filled with either warm or cold waters. Windows and vents artfully diverted steam to the outside. No sooner had Necahual deftly undressed me that I slid into the warm waters of a tub. A lifetime of bathing in rivers made me appreciate such luxury. I let out a sigh of pleasure as I leaned back, letting the warmth and steam wash away the soreness in my muscles, my exhaustion, and my dark thoughts. I heard a quick rustle of clothes behind me. I noticed Necahual piling my clothes out of the corner of my eye and then filling a small kettle with hot water. My silent guards were posted in each corner of the room, ready to taint the waters with blood at the first sign of danger. Even in this place, I can’t relax. Necahual poured her kettle behind me, the water streaming onto my shoulders. It smelled of plants and flagrant oils. No matter how much I want to. “What did you see?” Necahual asked behind me, the noise of running water hiding her words. “In the dungeons… You returned paler than when you came in.” “You heard the screams, did you not?” I scoffed. “Blood and terror. The answer is always blood and terror.” A week into my tenure, and I was already sick of both. “I see,” Necahual muttered, her expression grim. Her mind probably conjured terrifying pictures, none as horrifying as what I saw. “What of… the other thing?” Watching my improved physical prowess had only heightened her interest in learning magic. “There is a way,” I confessed, playing with the water. “But the price is too high.” Necahual squinted at me. “For you?” “For you,” I replied. Necahual’s lips twisted in anger. “Will I lose Eztli?” You already lost her long ago. Although I thought that, her answer did give me pause. Was her daughter’s life the price she was most afraid to pay? She might be a half-decent mother underneath all her scorn and bitterness. “No,” I replied. “The price will be yours alone to support.” Necahual shrugged in relief. “Then I will gladly pay it.” We would see how long that resolve would last. “Is that why you want to learn witchcraft?” I asked her as she started to wash my shoulders with a soapy sponge. “To save Eztli?” “Yes,” Necahual confirmed. When I thought her familial love alone had proved stronger than her distaste for magic, her voice became a little more unsteady. “And… for myself.” I looked over my shoulder. Her hands stroked the sponge with anger and bitterness. My mother-in-law gathered her breath and mustered her courage. “I have had enough,” Necahual confided. “Of what?” “Of feeling weak.” Her eyes avoided mine out of shame. “Of being weak.” Her deep frustration spoke to my heart, for I shared it. “It’s unbearable, isn’t it?” I said as she scratched my back with the sponge, washing away the dirt and sweat. “That’s how you made me feel for years.” “I know,” she admitted, her tone lower than earlier. “And I… I really am sorry for it.” I shrugged. As I warned her before, while I would try to move forward I would not forgive her either. “I need your help, Iztac,” Necahual insisted. “I want my daughter back. I want the strength to take her back. Even if…” She cleared her throat, struggling to find the right soft words. “Even if…” I snorted. “Even if you must become a monster?” “Yes.” At least she did not deny it. “I-I will do anything you ask of me. Accept any price I can pay.” “Even if that price is everything?” I pointed out. Necahual bit her tongue and nodded without hesitation. It was easy to consent to a great sacrifice when one didn’t understand it. “Disrobe,” I said suddenly. Necahual froze in place, the sponge falling from her hands and into the water. She stared at me in shock, wondering if—no, praying that—she had misheard. “Disrobe,” I repeated myself, pointing at the other end of the tube. “In front of me.” Necahual bit her lips, then silently moved to the other side of the tube. She faced me with a hint of fear, then untied her belt and let her cotton clothes slide onto the splashed marble floor. She tried to protect her modesty by covering her breasts and pubic hair with her hands, but I dissuaded her with a look. Necahual reluctantly let go, letting me admire her. Eztli had inherited her beauty from her mother, and much like my other concubines, other slaves made sure to pamper her. Necahual appeared to have lost a few years since she settled in the palace. Priceless oils helped smooth her wrinkles; her long black hair was cleaned and combed; good food had improved her health. Another man might have been aroused at the sight of her nakedness, but I only saw yet another reminder that the Nightlords made pampered pets of us all. We were no better than turkeys fattened for slaughter. The experience was deeply uncomfortable for the both of us… as it should be. “Get into the water,” I ordered her after a while. Mustering what little dignity she had left, Necahual silently slid into the tube. Her eyes were full of fear, as they should. Her arrival sent small waves splashing out of the tube. The moment she came within reach, I grabbed her jaw with my hand and pulled her lips closer. Her unsteady breath blew warm air onto my face. “That’s what it means to give me everything,” I warned her sternly. “Eternal slavery and humiliation. Your soul will be mine. Your life will be mine. You will have power, yes, but only as much as I give you. Do you understand?” Necahual glared back at me. “My life is already at your mercy.” “No, it is not. You still have a chance to escape with your freedom, however meager it is. Only death will wipe away this particular slave brand.” And even then, I wasn’t so sure. “You will live the rest of your existence knowing that you are at my mercy and that I can do anything to you on a whim. You will fear me the same way the priests fear their gods.” Only then did I release her jaw. Though Necahual’s natural bitterness returned in full force, her somber expression told me I had shaken her resolve. “If you’re not willing to spend the rest of your existence like this, as a higher power’s property,” I warned her, “then you should reconsider learning witchcraft.” Necahual bit her tongue without answering. I hoped I had scared her straight. I heard footsteps hitting water. Tezozomoc and Lady Sigrun approached our tub, the former clothed, the other hiding her nakedness under a thinly woven sheet of cotton. Ingrid’s mother appraised the scene with a calculating, amused look. “Your Imperial Majesty.” Tezozomoc stared at Necahual, who instinctively covered her naked breasts. He must have mistaken our interaction for something more intimate. “Are we interrupting⁠—” I suppressed a surge of disgust. “You interrupt nothing.” Tezozomoc clearly didn’t believe me, much to my annoyance. Nonetheless, I told myself that the word of this would at least pacify Yoloxochitl. A meager reassurance. “Are the sons ready to settle their father’s inheritance?” I asked. Tezozomoc nodded in agreement. “Then send them to us with haste.” Tezozomoc excused himself with a bow and left to pick up Xochipilli’s heirs. Lady Sigrun moved closer to the tube’s edge, her radiant golden hair falling like a waterfall on her shoulders. “I am glad to see you safe and sound, my emperor,” she said politely. “My dear Ingrid worried for your safety, as did I.” A polite lie. She probably knew by now that the Nightlords’ grip transcended even death. “Your concerns are welcome, but unwarranted,” I replied calmly. “As you can see, I am safe and sound, though in need of cleaning.” Lady Sigrun smiled ear to ear. “I will be glad to assist.” She let go of her cloth, revealing her perfect figure and pristine skin whiter than the bathhouse’s marble. To my slight embarrassment, my eyes basked in the glory of her body, of her perfect curves and sublime legs. Her golden hair reminded me of a waterfall as she slowly slid into the water to join us. She gracefully swam closer like a fish and comfortably took a place to my right. While Necahual scrubbed me with a sponge without a word, still mulling over the warning I gave her, Lady Sigrun gently stroked my chest with her delicate fingers, tracing lines along my navel. Her mere caress sent jolts of pleasure through my skin. Such was the state in which Tezozomoc found us when he returned with two men in tow. “Move closer,” I ordered Necahual. I pulled one arm around her waist and the other around Sigrun’s, then pulled them close. While Necahual recoiled slightly at my touch, whether out of shame or disgust, Lady Sigrun welcomed it. She understood I meant to give these men a spectacle, that we were all actors on a stage. “Your Imperial Majesty.” Tezozomoc knelt onto the water-soaked floor, imitated by the two men following him. My guards gathered around them in utter silence, weapons ready to strike at a moment’s notice. “Allow me to introduce the sons of the late Xochipilli—Tlazohtzin the elder and Tlaxcala the younger.” I gave the two a passing glance. Xochipilli’s sons couldn’t be more different, though their faces shared a familial resemblance. Tlazohtzin, the eldest heir, was a man in his early twenties with well-groomed short brown hair and practical traveling garbs. He appeared very much like an aspiring merchant eager to claim his fortune through clever wits, with strong muscles developed from years of carrying loads across the road. His younger and better-born brother, Tlaxcala, couldn’t have been older than sixteen, with a slim and refined frame that immediately told me he hadn’t worked a single day in his life. His high-status clothes included eagle feathers and jewelry. Both avoided my gaze, as was proper when in an emperor’s presence, though they were trembling. Tlaxcala, in particular, struggled not to ogle at the ladies in my company. While short, my experience with rulership had taught me a valuable lesson—that symbols mattered more than words. These two had put immense effort into putting on a good show… yet I welcomed them naked in the company of beautiful women without a care in the world. It didn’t beat welcoming them from atop the imperial throne, but it showcased the emperor’s power, splendor, and prestige. The message was clear. Their lives, their futures, were at my disposal. “You have five minutes each to make your case,” I said sternly. “Which one should go first, I wonder…” “Your Imperial Majesty, may I suggest you listen to Tlaxcala’s plea first?” Tezozomoc proposed. “By virtue of his esteemed mother Yaretzi’s lineage, he possesses noble blood.” Tlazohtzin clenched his fists in annoyance. He clearly didn’t like being reminded of his common origins. “If I may argue otherwise, my emperor,” Lady Sigrun suggested. “The young should always listen to their elders, should they not?” “True,” I replied. “I shall listen to Tlazohtzin first, then.” I had promised Lady Sigrun my help on the matter. Her presence at the audience, and the fact that I had listened to her advice over another advisor would add credence to her boast that she could influence my decisions. She would extract any price she wished from them now. Each brother briefly argued their case in turn, though I already knew the details. Tlazohtzin had been the eldest son of his father’s first wife and putative heir. He had helped develop his father’s business since the moment he came of age. He understood how to run the inns, brothels, and breweries his late sire had left behind. As the older and more experienced of the two brothers, he believed himself the best suited to manage Xochipilli’s inheritance… and I was tempted to agree with that. His brother Tlaxcala, meanwhile, based his argument not on merit but on birth. His mother was an influential noble from Yohuachanca’s capital and used her family’s influence to help Xochipilli buy property in the capital. As a scion of an esteemed lineage with the right connections, he argued that his father’s commercial empire would prosper better under his influence. “My mother’s uncle was an emperor and her aunt a consort,” Tlaxcala explained with a honeyed tone, as if it would help build kinship between us. “Her beauty is only matched by her wits, though both pale before those of your exalted companions, oh Great Emperor.” “Is that so?” I smiled and decided to test the waters. “Perhaps I should welcome her into my harem then. A fresh widow’s heart wanders without a man to warm her bed.” My bold words shocked both Tlazohtzin and Necahual, while Tezozomoc did his best to hide his disapproval. I meant it as an intentional provocation, to see just how far Tlaxcala was willing to go in greed’s name. A good son would have kept silent or tried to protect his family’s honor. Tlaxcala was not a good son. “I would gladly introduce my mother to Your Imperial Majesty, if it pleases you.” In short, they were both opportunists eager to curry imperial favor. Good. Very good. “You may both go,” I said, dismissing the two men. “You have given me much to think about.” In truth, I had already selected a winner, but I would wait for them to try bribing Lady Sigrun first before announcing my choice openly. Both brothers thanked me profusely and then crawled out of the bathhouse under Tezozomoc’s watchful gaze. “Quite the pair, those two,” Lady Sigrun mused. “Who will my emperor choose?” “Is it not obvious?” I shrugged. “Tlaxcala.” Necahual scowled in disapproval. “That snake does not deserve it.” “Indeed,” Lady Sigrun replied with a chuckle. “Hence why he will pay more to get what he wants.” That was my reasoning as well. Tlazohtzin was by far the superior choice, with experience and diligence to match… but his brother was both better connected and willing to do anything for the inheritance. As unjust as it sounded, Tlaxcala would better serve my interests. “My emperor is wise and far-sighted,” Lady Sigrun said with a mischievous tone. “The war he prophesied shall soon be upon us.” She was no more blind to my plot than Chikal before her. “Luck smiles upon me.” I marked a short pause for emphasis. “And those that I favor.” “Of course.” Lady Sigrun leaned in closer to whisper in my ear. “You will be pleased to learn that your source’s advice proved true. I shall recover the books I seek with haste.” Now was my chance. “The First Emperor’s codices?” Lady Sigrun was an experienced politician and a master of spycraft. She had spent decades hiding her true feelings and strengthened her self-control the way Chikal intended to train my body. So when her eyes subtly widened in genuine shock and surprise, I knew I had thrown her off her game. She was collecting the First Emperor’s writings. “The second volume is quite the interesting book,” I said, pushing my advantage. “Such strange theological views, don’t you agree?” Even Necahual, who did not understand my statement’s significance, sensed their importance. However, I had failed to shake Lady Sigrun’s composure. Her look of surprise did not last long. “My emperor is wise indeed.” Lady Sigrun rested her chin on my shoulder, her hands gently tracing lines down to my navel. I felt something else rise as her fingers caressed me. “And well-learned.” “Perhaps we could exchange reading recommendations tonight,” I suggested. “But of course.” She gave me a smile full of shining, perfect teeth. “My emperor learns quickly.” Yes, I did. The more I understood this game’s rules, the better I played it. From Chikal to Xochipilli’s sons, I was starting to figure out how to use the emperor’s powers effectively. I might not be Yohuachanca’s ultimate authority… but I was still pretty damn close. “It is time, Your Imperial Majesty.” I turned my head at Tezozomoc, who had returned. “Lady Yoloxochitl and Lady Eztli await you,” he said. “The New Fire Ceremony is upon us.” part0027. 22THE SULFUR SUN The palace’s temple reeked of blood and tar. I had come to expect the former from all the vampires’ creations, but the latter had come to surprise me. From the Nightlords’ dark abode at the center of my palace to their secret altars, every place of significance to these parasites’ false religion included at least one pool of the black, viscous substance. A moat’s worth of that filth filled the palace’s temple, surrounding a hill of ashes standing tall under a black dome of obsidian. A large hole in the ceiling let the moon illuminate the room with its ephemeral light. Murals representing cosmic phenomena, from the dance of constellations to the rise of an eclipsed sun, adorned the sturdy wall. Rows after rows of stone benches filled the hall, with no one to sit upon them. The temple’s true masters looked down on me from above. I felt their crimson eyes gaze upon me the moment I stepped alone into this unhallowed sanctuary. I looked up to match their glares. A flock of Nightkin hung upside down from the ceiling, their talons sinking into the obsidian to lock them in place, their jet-black wings furled like mantles of darkness. I could hardly distinguish their numbers in the darkness. Dozens, maybe hundreds of them? Whatever the case, a court full of vampires had gathered to witness this ceremony. “Come, Iztac,” an oh-so-familiar voice called out to me. Yoloxochitl’s kindly whispers never failed to inspire dread. I crossed a bridge of stone over the moat of tar and walked into the moonlight. Yoloxochitl awaited me at the ashen hill’s bottom, alongside Eztli. I couldn’t tell how I managed to keep a blank expression when I saw them. Yoloxochitl had lowered her robes just enough to reveal her naked chest. Eztli knelt in front of the Nightlord, her fangs biting into her left breast and sucking her vampiric progenitor’s sick black blood. The scene might have seemed titillating to some, but not to me. Eztli’s sharp fangs pierced through her mistress’ skin deep enough to reach the swelling veins below, yet not a single drop trickled down. My consort’s eyes were lost in an expression of ultimate pleasure and satiation. She didn’t even notice my presence. Her hands tightly gripped Yoloxochitl’s breast, squeezing and holding on to it. The more Eztli tasted the Nightlord’s blood, the thirstier she became. I almost thought she would chew out her flesh to make the process faster. The thirst had overtaken her mind. Yoloxochitl appeared to share in her brood’s pleasure too. She moaned and chuckled with each suction, her eyes closed and her tongue sticking out of her cursed mouth. “Yes,” I heard her whisper, her hand gently caressing the back of Eztli’s head. “Yes, my daughter, feed on… If thou be thirsty, then drink…” Another man might have found the scene arousing. I personally struggled not to vomit. A lifetime ago, I had witnessed women breastfeeding their infant children on Acampa’s riverbank. The beautiful miracle of a mother nourishing the new life they had helped bring into this cruel world. The scene before my eyes was a mockery of this sacred human moment, a twisted reflection of reality cast on a cursed obsidian mirror. An ancient parasite feeding its ill-gotten blood to a stolen daughter. Necahual’s usurpation as a living mother was a reminder that Eztli’s life now belonged to another. The fact I knew exactly how the Nightlord looked beneath her beautiful human mask only heightened my disgust. “Mother Yoloxochitl,” I said, hoping reminding them of my presence would end this twisted union. Thankfully, it did. Yoloxochitl smiled at me sweetly, then gently shooed Eztli away from her breast. My friend and consort whined like an animal denied its meal, but did not resist the Nightlord’s command. The bite marks she had left on Yoloxochitl’s breast closed instantaneously. “Greet your husband properly, my daughter,” she commanded. Sanity instantly returned to Eztli’s gaze. She blinked a few times, as if awakening from a pleasurable dream, then noticed my presence at last. The blissful smile on her lips swiftly faded, a flash of shame crossing her dilated eyes. “Iztac,” she said, black blood dripping down her chin. “Sorry for the mess.” She doesn’t like me seeing her like this, but vampires are compelled to obey their progenitor’s orders. Just remembering this detail filled me up with disgust. One night, I shall free you. “How does it feel?” I asked her, slightly afraid of the answer. “Wonderful, Iztac. Like drinking the heavens themselves.” Eztli forced herself to smile for Yoloxochitl’s sake and licked the blackened blood on her face, consuming every last drop. “You should try it too.” I know she only meant it to stay in the Nightlord’s good graces, but the very idea of sucking Yoloxochitl’s blood, of inviting any part of her into my body, repulsed me to my core. I loathed the thought of that parasite strengthening her already unbearable hold over my soul and body. Yoloxochitl smiled kindly at Eztli before covering her breasts with her robes. “He cannot,” she said before turning her attention to me. “You cannot, Iztac.” “Why is that?” I wondered while doing my best to hide my relief. Come to think of it, wouldn’t it have been easier for them to bind me the way the Nightlords bound their red-eyed priests? “Your blood must stay pure,” the Nightlord replied calmly. “My sisters and I share a bond with you deeper than any familial tie. However, our union requires balance. The north cannot encroach on the south, nor the west on the east.” The truth became clear to me. Beneath all the esoterism, the Nightlords simply didn’t want either of them to gain more power over whatever ritual bound my soul to their altar. They had ruled so long by sharing power and not vying over it. I was almost tempted to drink Yoloxochitl’s blood and sow chaos between the sisters, but a mere glance at Eztli’s ecstatic, addled expression convinced me otherwise. To partake in a vampire’s blood would mean tightening my own chains. “Moreover, while our blood would preserve you from time’s sway, it would also wither your loins,” Yoloxochitl said. “Your divine blood must keep flowing, my son.” As always, I was nothing more than a breeding turkey. I was almost tempted to ask Yoloxochitl what happened to the previous emperors’ sons, to lift the veil of that particular mystery from my mind. No, not yet. Patience. I needed to build more trust beforehand, lest I arouse suspicion. “What of my blood?” I asked cautiously, hiding my malice behind a mask of generosity. The very thought of letting a vampire feed on me disgusted me, but the Parliament of Skulls promised me that the fire in my veins would hurt them. “Would you partake in my blood if I offered it, Mother Yoloxochitl?” Will you let my burning blood incinerate your veins from within? Will you bite my neck and partake in this poisoned meal? “You are very kind, my child, but I must refuse,” Yoloxochitl replied, albeit with a hint of reluctance. I caught a brief flash of thirst and desire when she stared at my neck. “I am forbidden to taste your blood until the Scarlet Moon. There are laws that even I must obey.” I had expected that answer and did not push the subject further. Even if she decided to feed on my blood—a prospect that frightened me as much as I relished the thought of poisoning her—I lacked the strength to overpower her afterward. Feeding her my blood would weaken the Nightlord, but it would not destroy her. I too would be patient. Yoloxochitl felt the thirst and fought back the hunger. She wanted to drink my blood, only holding herself back from fear of punishment… and when there was a will, there was a way. Forbidden pleasures possessed an allure that made them difficult to resist, and Yoloxochitl had proved herself to be deeply impulsive, enough to upset her sisters’ plans and go against their will by claiming Eztli as a Nightkin. She lacked the Jaguar Woman’s self-control. She would give in if properly pushed. The Parliament of Skulls asked me to cultivate my relationship with Yoloxochitl until I could learn more about her fatal weapon. And I could go farther. I could lay the groundwork for her demise. Be the snake in the grass, closing in for the fatal bite. Vampirism had unbalanced Yoloxochitl’s mind and filled it with dark obsessions. Her madness followed a logic of its own. I had to play into it. To put a Veil on her deeper than any illusion, to slowly lower her mental defenses until she finally gave in. A seduction of a sort. “Now, my son, give your mother a kiss,” the Nightlord said. I dutifully obeyed, my lips touching her cold, lifeless cheek. Think of victory. As I told myself that, I blocked the horrific memories of vines and claws erupting from under that pristine skin. Everything is permitted in the pursuit of victory. “How was your training today?” Yoloxochitl asked as if she cared. “We were told you performed admirably,” Eztli mused with a mischievous, malicious smirk. “Much to our dear Chikal’s appreciation.” “I have heard that your Amazon consort proved…” A flash of anger passed through Yoloxochitl’s eyes. “Rough.” “She is a harsh teacher, but a fair one,” I argued, hoping to spare Chikal a deadly visit. “No man has become a great warrior from being coddled.” “That is true, Iztac,” Yoloxochitl confirmed. “However, much like an eagle looks down upon turkeys struggling on the ground, an emperor stands above the petty indignities of battle. Your spear is an army, and your shield is a thousand protectors ready to die for you.” “That may be so, Mother, but I remember you saying that our poor soldiers deserved comfort.” That was how she had justified trying to enslave Necahual not so long ago. “Seeing their emperor share their struggles will be like balm to their wounded hearts.” “It is one thing to be bold, Iztac, and another to be wise,” Yoloxochitl declared with what could pass for wisdom. “Promise me not to endanger yourself, child. It wounds me to see you threatened.” Then you should spare me the altar. Her terrible actions spoke louder than her empty words. “I have no doubt your benediction shall grant me victory,” I said, baiting her. “Though, if I may ask, what is this great weapon that will turn the tide against the Sapa?” “Patience, Iztac.” Yoloxochitl lightly stroked my cheek, as if to reprimand an overeager child. “Miracles must be seen, not heard. This flower shall bloom in due time. An emperor’s duties to his subjects pale before those he owes the heavens, and for now, a greater task awaits you.” I nodded dutifully, suppressing a flash of anger. The time hadn’t come yet. “As Mother wishes.” “Worry not; all your prayers shall eventually be answered.” Yoloxochitl waved a hand at the hill of ash, inviting me to look upon it. “The year cometh to an end, Iztac. As emperor, it is your duty to see that past afflictions and sins do not carry into the new cycle of the world.” I looked up at the hill’s summit and caught a glimpse of a figure kneeling at its top, hands joined in prayer. A shiver went down my spine as I realized what “sin” I would purge from this world. A headless, desiccated corpse with a perfectly carved hole at the center of its chest towered high above me. Though its mummification had made him thinner, I immediately recognized to whom this husk had once belonged to. Even in death and desecration, the Nightlords had clothed him like an emperor, with rich finery and golden filigranes. I stared at the beheaded corpse of Nochtli the Fourteenth, whose skull had joined my reliquary. I had witnessed my predecessor’s murder alongside the rest of the empire, watching in silent dread as the Nightlords carved his chest open and fed his heart to their sinister sire. Should I fail to defeat the sisters, my remains would one night stand atop this altar in silent desecration. “These are the past emperors’ ashes.” Yoloxochitl’s hands settled on my shoulders, her nails as sharp as an eagle’s talons. She loomed behind me like death’s shadow. “Much like my father before them, they too have suffered the penance of fire. While their skulls rest in the reliquary, their remains shall fuel the flames of a new year free of sin.” I ought to throw you into the fire then. “I see no flame yet.” “For you must light it with your own hands,” Yoloxochitl explained. “For the next four nights, you shall tend to it from sunset to sunrise. Feed it. Cherish it. Then, on the fifth day, you shall ascend to the top of the world and herald the dawn of a new year.” “Sunset to sunrise?” My heart stopped. “I… forgive me, but I had planned for Ingrid and her mother to visit me tonight.” And moreover, I had promised the Yaotzin a payment for the night. If I failed to deliver in time, I dreaded to imagine the resulting penalty. “They shall await until dawn,” Eztli whispered into my ear. “Do not worry. I shall keep you company until then.” “These next few days shall be trying, my child,” Yoloxochitl said, her tone gentle but firm. “But the cosmos demands it.” I hadn’t expected this nor had been informed. Moreover, it would disrupt my journey to the Underworld. While I could catch up on some hours of sleep in the morning, my imperial agenda would force me to awaken early. “Is this year different?” I asked, hiding my frustration behind a veil of curiosity. “I was not told that the ritual would take all night.” “Every fifty-two years mark the beginning of a new celestial cycle,” Yoloxochitl replied. “This requires more effort on your part, for you do not inaugurate a new year alone. You shall usher in a new era for our empire.” The last one, I hope. With few options left, I removed my sandals and began to ascend the mountain of ashes. Eztli followed behind me as my shadow. Whereas my feet soon turned gray from the remains of my burned predecessors, her own skin remained untouched. A vampire climbing a dead mountain with none of their malice staining them. They felt terribly cold on my skin, without any warmth. How terribly appropriate for the current situation. “Do you truly think there are only six hundred corpses beneath us?” Eztli sinisterly whispered into my ear. “Seems too few if you ask me.” “Only the emperors are remembered,” I guessed as we continued our ascent. I had witnessed enough cremations that even the tallest of men hardly left a handful of ashes after death. To raise a hill would take countless thousands. “I always wondered what happened to the flesh and bones of my dinners after I fulfilled my thirst.” Eztli dusted some of the ashes from her robes. Her skin might be spared from their clutches, but her clothes were not. “Do you think some of them are father’s?” I stopped briefly and peeked at her from over my shoulder. Eztli returned my gaze with cold, sad eyes. “I am serious,” she said. “I do not know what they did with his remains.” While I was relieved that she still showed some concern for Guatemoc’s corpse after killing him herself, I didn’t expect her to discuss the matter with such eerie calmness. “I don’t know,” I replied. “And between us, I hope he’s not here. He deserves better than being trampled upon.” Eztli looked away, hiding her thoughts from me. “I suppose…” Once again, I found myself wondering how much of my old friend remained inside the vampire she had become… and if that spark of humanity would survive the allure of her undead sire’s blood. Eztli smiled back at me. She knew me well enough to guess what was on my mind. “Her blood does not affect me more than pulque does, Iztac. Though it does taste far better than any drink.” Eztli lightly kissed me on the neck, her lips still warm from the recent feast. “Unless you want me to breastfeed you mine?” A chill traveled down my spine. “No, I don’t.” “I’m joking, Iztac. You have mothers as it is.” Eztli’s smile faded. “I don’t like it.” I snorted. “The breastfeeding?” “The way you look at me,” she replied. “I would rather see you laugh with me than be sad for me.” An awkward silence settled between us, and we continued our ascent without a word. I struggled to understand Eztli’s behavior. I had the feeling she attempted to hide her pain and sorrow under a veil of wit and cruel humor, but no matter what she said, I was certain these breastfeeding sessions ate away at her humanity. Pulque and alcohol drove men to madness if abused. A Nightlord’s blood drove their priests into slavish devotion. If Eztli consumed too much… she might completely fall under Yoloxochitl’s sway and reveal our treachery. I had to find a way to break or subvert their budding blood bond. Perhaps I should feed Eztli the blood of the other Nightlords. This might dilute her particular enthrallment to Yoloxochitl… No, that would probably worsen things. The First Emperor’s codices had to provide insight on the matter. He had sired the curse after all. At long last we reached the top under the pale moonlight. I stood before Nochtli’s mummified remains in silent contemplation. A bundle of dry reeds lay within the open chest cavity, alongside a wood spindle and small bow meant to trigger a fire. I counted fifty-two of the former, one for each year of a solar cycle. You stood in my place once, my predecessor. Was this the moment you decided to rebel? It did you no good, but I swear to the true gods, I shall avenge you and all of those who helped me climb to you. With Eztli watching over my shoulder, I aligned the spindle to the middle of the reeds, tied the bowstring around it, and then moved the small bow left and right. I knew the motions by heart. No man could reach adulthood without learning how to start a fire. The thought of burning the Nightlords to death gave me the strength to carry on with the task. My resolve swiftly paid off. A spark ignited among the dry reeds, feeble yet alive. A flame grew within Nochtli the Fourteenth’s chest cavity, slowly consuming the reeds to grow in strength. Smoke arose from the beheaded corpse’s severed neck and moved up toward the hole in the ceiling. “This takes me back,” Eztli mused. She raised her hands toward the newborn flame, her fingers touching it so close that I worried she might catch fire herself. “I miss the warmth.” “What’s next?” I asked. The reeds wouldn’t last all night. “You will stay here to tend the fire, give it prayers, curses, confess your crimes, whatever you want.” Eztli shrugged. “Meanwhile, I shall come back and forth with old things to burn. Yours is the easy part.” In short, she would resupply me while I wasted my time watching over the flame until sunrise. “Who will take over during the day?” “Priests, I suppose?” Eztli shrugged. “This is all for show.” The Parliament of Skulls thought the same. My predecessors never found what magical purpose, if any, this ritual served beyond its symbolism. Was this truly a trick of the mind meant to add weight to a false religion, or did it serve a higher purpose? I meant to check for myself. I peeked over my shoulder, the eyes of the Nightkin upon me, while Yoloxochitl watched me from the hill’s feet. I cloaked myself in the Veil and felt the weight of their attention upon me. Thankfully, as Huehuecoyotl taught me, I gave them an illusion of what they expected of me—me staring at a small fire in silent contemplation. No tide of disbelief came to wash my magic away. The vampires had witnessed this scene play out time and time again for more than six hundred years. So long as I did not turn the Gaze spell directly at them, they would not sense its radiance. Henceforth, I knelt before my predecessor’s remains and moved my face close to the budding fire. Reveal your secrets to me. I activated my Gaze spell and stared into the newborn flame. If you keep any. The sunlight of my heart poured through my eyes and illuminated the small flame my hands had brought into the world. I saw nothing out of the ordinary. The light of my soul revealed no secret my own eyes couldn’t perceive before. This fire carried no magical power whatsoever. This is all a fraud. Unsurprising, but still disappointing. Another lie atop a pyramid of falsehood. I took a deep breath and mentally prepared myself for the tiresome, pointless task ahead of me. The smoke filled my nostrils, followed by a terrible stench. I coughed in surprise and nausea, much to Eztli’s confusion. “Are you well, Iztac?” she asked me softly. “Do you smell that?” I asked her. “Smell what?” That terrible stench of rotten eggs and the smell of burning corpses. I could hardly inhale a whiff of smoke without wanting to vomit. It felt oh-so-familiar, though it took me a while to recognize it. Sulfur. Necahual and other women often used it in our village to chase away vermin after the harvest season. I had always disliked the smell of it. However, nothing could compare to the odious smoke rising from this flame. Did the Nightlords put sulfur in with the reeds? As I wondered, I observed the blaze with renewed attention. I detected no such fuel. Does it come from the flame itself? I gazed once more into the fire, searching with my eyes… until I saw it. A black spot in the center. A blot of darkness in the light’s very heart. A small point no larger than a needle’s head, unchanging and unwavering. The longer I stared at it, the stronger my heart pounded in my chest. Its beat echoed like a war drum in my head, a searing heat growing in my chest. The longer I stared at the blot, the harder it became to look away. Eztli’s words became distant whispers that my mind could no longer comprehend. The nauseating stench of sulfur overwhelmed me like a tide. The fumes addled my mind and overwhelmed my senses in a nauseous flood of confusing sensations. The blot grew to encompass it, the seed of darkness blooming into an all-consuming night. Thick shadows as warm as blood swallowed the light of my Gaze spell, leaving me alone in the endless black. A new flame arose from nothing when I thought myself bereft of radiance… yet this fire offered no comfort. It was blue and streaked with yellow—the poisonous inferno rising from the sulfur pits. Something stared back at me. Something great and terrible. A pressure as overwhelming as King Mictlantecuhtli’s judgment fell upon my soul—not the cosmic weight of death’s unfeeling gaze and the burden of eons past, but the primal fear of an endless night and the agony of bottomless hunger. I felt my lungs drowning in an ocean of blood and the piercing bites of a million screeching bats. I shared a thirst that no sea could ever hope to satiate, heard the call of a final feast of murdered stars, looked upon a crown of terror, and listened to the scream of a mountain of seared flesh burning in a boiling sulfur pit. I felt its terrible gaze flay my mortal skin and peek at the feeble fire within my chest, at the four leashes coiling around my soul and the withered hands holding them. Great fangs sharper than obsidian towers flashed in the flame with indescribable fury, and a tongue uttered a curse carrying the venom of transcendental hatred. A single word with the power to shatter stone, a fatal accusation, and a deadly prophecy of retribution to come. T̸̟̩̪̳͍̰̮̈́̃̑͌̑̑͐͋͋̑̒͜ŕ̵̨̨̛̠͕̭̩̮̞̬̤̠͎̲̥͙̤͈̮̲̖̘͖͎̘̯̘̺̘͍̫̘͓͉̙̋͒̊͊͒́͂̾̃̐̾͂̄̅̈́̔̎͋̄̀͆͆͌̋̓̽̑͐̾̋͊̔̃́͗͘͜͜͜͠͝ͅà̸̡̨̬̜̱̞̤͓̥̼̰͕̗̜̘̹̻͕̪̗̐̈̌̾̒̃͗̇͂́͝͝i̷̧̧͚̰̩͖͕͕͔̱̞͓̤͚̥̗͕̝̬̞̻̲̺̺͂͆͆͑́̓̇̓͊̏̋̈́̋̃̉̈́̿̈́̕̕͠ͅt̸̨̨̛̖͇͍̯̜̲͙͔̗̫̰͇̼̟͗̀̾̔̔̎̐͂̾̏͜͠͝ͅơ̴̡̨͎͓̙̻̝͇̞̯̻͉̞̰̝͌͂̎̄̈́̓̄̏̅̌͑͌̓͆̇͗̅͐͐̃͌͆͋͋̈́͂̕͜͠r̸̞̱̖͇̯͚̹̼̼̫̱͍̼͕̭̳̂̊͆̈̒̒̀́̐̎́̽͑̾̑͛̇̕̕͝s̷̲̻̥̮̗̬̞͓̺̤̿̀͊̊͐͗̈́̔̅̓͗̂̕̚̕͘͝͠͠ͅ By the time I canceled my Gaze spell and pulled back to reality, a concert of screeches and flapping wings filled the hall. A mighty wind blew on my face, sending a cloud of ashes flying in all directions—the cinders suddenly as hot as if they had been extracted from a freshly made fire. The temple had descended into chaos. The Nightkin flock screamed above me. They flew through the hole in the ceiling like the bat swarm that they were. Eztli had gone still at my side, her skin paler than snow, her crimson eyes staring at Nochtli’s flaming heart with utter dread. She had frozen in place the way a rabbit froze when facing a jaguar’s presence. The flame had turned blue. Not the azure from Tlaloc’s sun, no, but the yellow-tainted blue flame born of sulfur pits. It had consumed the reeds and now glowed within the chest cavity without spreading further. No smoke rose from it, though its nauseating smell remained all-consuming. “It finally happened,” Yoloxochitl’s voice whispered behind me. How did she climb the hill so silently? “After so many centuries… it has finally happened.” Her cold hands coiled around me like snakes, one hand touching my chest, the other my belly. I felt the Nightlord lean against me, holding and fondling me like a prized pet. I thanked my instinct for canceling my spells in alarm before she could catch sight of them. “Oh Iztac, you are wonderful.” She kissed me on the cheek and the neck, half like a mother happy with their child’s performance and half like a favored lover. It raised shivers on my skin all the same. “You are a blessed child, the holiest of rulers.” I held my breath in silence. A terrible cold followed her proclamations, and three winged shadows descended from the ceiling from the same hole through which the Nightkin escaped. I could hardly distinguish them through the clouds of ash, and when they landed on the hill, they had all taken back human forms. Eztli, having finally regained her senses, knelt instantly as three hooded, masked figures surrounded us. They’re here. My blood turned cold. They’ve answered the call. The other Nightlords had joined their sisters to witness this strange miracle. They formed a circle around Nochtli’s remains, as if ready to tear him limb from limb again. “I thought the chains broke, but this…” Sugey, the Bird of War, crossed her arms. Was that dread or joy that I saw in her trembling fingers? “This is it…” Iztacoatl nodded in excitement. “The flame burns with smokeless sulfur. A sacred hunger that requires no sustenance.” She raised a hand, feverishly approaching the flame. “All the power we can drain from this…” The Jaguar Woman angrily slapped her sister’s hand away from the fire. “Restrain yourself,” she chided her sibling. “Those are favorable auspices, but fraught with peril.” Chains? Did they mean the chains around my soul? A few of their words drew my attention too. Drain? Not gain? “I do not understand,” I whispered, fishing for information. “Our Dark Father has blessed your divine rule, Iztac,” Yoloxochitl replied with motherly pride. “This age, your age, shall be one of blessed darkness and glory. Fifty-two years of terror await our enemies.” “Our sister speaks true, Iztac Ce Ehecatl,” the Jaguar Woman said. The blue flame’s hue reflected in her exposed eyes. “Your term will be the most important since our empire’s foundation. Feed the flame, child. Feed it.” “With what?” I rasped. “Blood.” The Jaguar Woman turned to Eztli, her tone hasty and imperious. “Fetch him blood!” I spent the night trying to douse that cursed flame. If the Nightlords wanted it to burn, then it made sense for me to smother it in return. I had little luck with that. First of all, the four sisters stood watch over their twisted prize. They observed my work with the zeal of taskmasters. I was only allowed to pour the cups of blood Eztli climbed the ashen mountain back and forth with. The longer the night went on, the more I started to doubt that anything could extinguish this unnatural fire. It consumed blood and wood alike without leaving any waste. The fluids did not boil or turn to steam upon contact. They simply vanished into the blue fire. The flame neither grew larger nor hotter no matter how much blood I fed it. I was filling a bottomless hole from which nothing escaped. My task appeared as pointless as it was mind-numbing. “The dawn approaches,” Yoloxochitl said after many hours. “Go rest, my child. You have earned it.” “We shall meet again at sundown,” the Jaguar Woman added. “Do not delay.” I considered disobeying, but her tone implied that they would drag me to this place if I did. Whatever purpose this ritual served, the Nightlords considered it important enough to oversee personally. I climbed down the ashen mountain with Eztli’s help. She had helped me transport bloody cups all night long without ever uttering a word. Her hollow gaze was empty of its usual mischief and bravery. “Eztli?” I asked once we finally left the temple. I admit I found myself relieved to escape this place, though it was short-lived. My silent guards dutifully flanked me the moment I walked into the next corridor. “Eztli, are you well?” My friend and consort suddenly seemed to remember my presence. “Do you remember that time we found a snake in the river two years ago?” “Of course I do.” It had given her quite the scare then. “That flame… It frightens me the same way, Iztac.” Eztli rubbed her arms with her hands. I had never seen her so scared since… she had turned. “It wants to eat me. I can tell.” “I won’t let it harm you,” I promised her. At this moment, she gave me the strangest of looks. Despair, sorrow, and something I couldn’t quite understand—something unbelievably sad. “You are sweet, Iztac,” Eztli said softly, “but what makes you think I want you to?” She vanished into the shadows before I could ask her what she meant. “Eztli?” I called out to her, shaken by her response. “Eztli?” Only my silent guards’ steps answered me. I was surrounded by armed men, and yet alone once again. Somehow, Eztli’s words frightened me as much as whatever terror the Nightlords brewed in that flame of theirs. Tired as I was, I did not return to my chambers immediately. Instead, I went to the reliquary—officially to meditate; unofficially to consult with my predecessors. The previous emperors’ skulls were already awake when I arrived, their empty sockets shining with an eldritch glow. I took it as a dire warning. They had witnessed tonight’s events through our link, and found it concerning. “What happened?” I asked immediately. “What was that?” “Something that’s never happened before.” Six hundred skulls marked a short pause, their minds clearly struggling to understand what they had witnessed. “The flame has never turned blue since the New Fire Ceremony started, nor did the Nightlords show so much interest in its upkeep. This is unprecedented.” A word that did not warm my heart. As for the creature I had witnessed in the fire… that glimpse into an abyss of absolute evil and hunger… “That thing in the flame…” Remembering it alone caused my heartbeat to quicken. “Could it be…?” “Mayhaps,” the Parliament replied. They had guessed the likely source of the power within. “Or maybe not. We cannot be certain yet.” The previous emperors spoke with wisdom, but I sensed their fear beneath the caution. The four sisters were feeble shadows compared to that entity’s power and malice. “There is another detail you should know, our successor,” the skulls said. “When the sulfur flame lit up, we sensed a surge of power rising from deep below the Blood Pyramid.” “The Blood Pyramid?” I immediately thought of whatever horror took place there—something so terrible the Parliament would not speak of it. “Why?” “It’s unclear as of now, but we can warrant a guess,” the Parliament said. “The ritual sacrifice of emperors to their progenitor imbues the Nightlords with magic. The New Fire Ceremony and the Scarlet Moon probably feed into each other somehow. A threshold of some kind has been crossed, whether from the weight of six hundred years of sorrow or because of some cosmic alignment.” I supposed their mountain of ashes had grown big enough. “The Nightlords hope that this sulfur flame will strengthen them.” “All the more reason to douse it, our successor. The quicker, the better.” “Douse it with what, water?” I replied dryly. “It consumes all that comes in contact with it. Neither will the Nightlords let me out of their sight.” The skulls fell into the silent gloom. They had no more solutions to offer than I did. For perhaps the first time since we formed an alliance, they were at a loss as to what to do next. We had ventured into unknown territory where old wisdom could not help us. I replayed tonight’s events in my mind, trying to grasp their significance. I was certain that important details, if not overlooked, would prove key to our future victory. The First Emperor still existed. The Nightlords feared his wrath, my soul was bound to his altar, and the vampire curse endured. Tales said he had become the new sun in the sky in a great act of benevolence and that without blood to sustain him, he would cast the universe into eternal darkness. If… If the entity I had received a glimpse of was indeed the First Emperor, then he was indeed burning. Not in a sun’s heart, though. I had witnessed dead suns and tasted their embers. The flames consuming the First Emperor were of a different sort, their smell unmistakable. A sulfur cage. Neither did I feel any kindness or martyrdom coming from this dreadful vampire progenitor. I only tasted a sip of endless hate and bottomless hunger. No fire burned half as hot as that monster’s wrath. As for that final curse he uttered… It was not directed at me, but at the four parasites claiming to be his daughters and heirs… Traitors. The word echoed in my head, sharp and clear. Traitors. “What if…” I cleared my throat, a risky idea forming in my mind. “What if we didn’t douse the flame?” The old emperors wisely listened. “Explain yourself.” “I caught a glimpse of what fuels the fire,” I reminded them. “Whether it was the First Emperor or something else, it resents the Nigthlords with a hatred that surpasses even ours. That, and the sisters… they said they would drain power from the flame.” “You believe that this power is not granted willingly,” the Parliament guessed. “It is stolen.” “I think so,” I confirmed. “What if instead of canceling the Nightlords’ ritual, we could cause it to backfire on them? Let the entity reap its revenge against them?” For the second time since I had met them, the skulls making up the Parliament started silently debating between themselves. Such was the gravity of my suggestion. “We presume that you understand the risks at hand,” they said upon reaching a consensus. “Sorcery of this magnitude is like wielding an obsidian dagger without a hilt. A single mistake might spell your destruction.” “We have all perished once before,” I replied with determination. I had stabbed my own heart to spite the sisters on the very first night of my rule. I could do it again if needed. “While I would rather live to see Yohuachanca crumble, I will gladly offer my life to drag the Nightlords down into the Underworld’s depths.” “Your resolve does you credit, our successor.” The dead emperors rattled in approval. “We must ponder this further and gather more information. Until then, you should rest and think, our successor. We can discuss our options with a clearer mind afterward.” I excused myself with a final bow, so tired that I relished the thought of going to bed. Yet my mind remained worried. If the First Emperor truly fueled that sinister ritual, then it made it all the more imperative to study his codices. I needed to obtain those books by whatever means necessary. Only then could I cut the vampire curse off at its source. part0028. 23WRATH OF THE CONDOR KING Once, when I trained to become a merchant, I received a wise piece of advice—the only thing worse than debt was being late for its payment. Especially once your debtor was called the Enemy of Both Sides. When the wind blew on my face under dawn’s light, my body and mind tired from yet another night of terror and sorcery, I knew I would not get away with giving away meager gossip. The Yaotzin had shielded my words from listening ears against the promise of important information by sunrise, yet the sun had already risen. I could only pray that the chaotic forces of the cosmos had decided to show patience. “Patience is the virtue of the powerful,” the Yaotzin whispered ominously in my ear as I triggered my Augury spell. “Do not waste ours.” I joined my hands and considered what information I could share. I considered what gossip I had gathered and what secret betrayals and jealousies I had uncovered. The murder Sigrun committed on my behalf, the truth about the Sapa invasion, Chikal’s dubious allegiances… Most of what I had learned might come back to harm current and potential allies. However, I had spent many days gathering information about my foes. I now saw a way to kill two birds with one stone. “The Nightlords have lit a sulfur flame for the New Fire Ceremony tonight,” I whispered under my breath. “A flame from which they hope to harness great magical power.” The Yaotzin desired to trade secrets that would harm others. Let the Nightlords’ enemies learn of their witchery. The wind suddenly grew stronger. The quiet breeze became a gust strong enough to send one of my imperial headdress’s quetzal feathers flying away. I had the Yaotzin’s full attention. “They intend to drain the strength of a powerful being.” I almost mentioned the First Emperor, but the Yaotzin only accepted the truth. While I strongly suspected the identity behind the source of the Nightlords’ wicked flames, I still couldn’t confirm it. Caution would prevail. Besides, I could always sell that information away later. “A being of darkness and hunger raging in a sulfur cage.” No cryptic words nor dire prophecy answered me. The wind kept blowing, carrying my whispers away to those who would pay the price to hear them. I couldn’t tell if I should take it as a good or a bad sign. “Was it sufficient?” I whispered under my breath. “Are we even?” “A great price you have paid, and the debt is settled,” the wind answered me this time. “The birds shall listen. Wings of gold and shadow talons, condor king and mother of witches.” “The birds?” Condor? I had never heard that word before. Mother of witches was almost as elusive, though I had my suspicions about whom it might be. “What do you mean? To whom will you share this information?” “An even trade you must make,” the Yaotzin replied, never missing an occasion to shake me down. “Foes of the sisters do not friends make.” Of course, the wind would word its answer so cryptically. I would kill for a straightforward sentence. Still, the meaning sounded simple to me—the Nightlords’ rivals were not necessarily my friends. The enemy of my enemy was often just that and no more. I didn’t mind, so long as they would work to ruin the Nightlords’ plans first and foremost. Once I had completed the Augury, I moved to my chambers with a headache and sore muscles. My enhanced Teyolia’s divine endurance still had its limits. Chikal’s training and a night spent praying over a cursed flame had left me drained. I didn’t think awakening the sulfur flame had changed me in any way… or if it did, I couldn’t tell yet. I’d better take this information to Queen Mictecacihuatl. She would provide good advice. As expected, I found Ingrid and her mother waiting for me, both of them clad in the most sumptuous of dresses. Servants, Necahual chief among them, had brought a harp and set the table for the evening dinner, which I had missed. “Lord Emperor,” my consort greeted me with a smile. The dark rings around Ingrid’s eyes indicated they had been there all night. “We thought ourselves bereft of your presence.” “My apologies for the lateness,” I said as Necahual helped me remove my imperial headdress and cloak wordlessly. My silent guards took positions in all corners of the room, observing the scene with their weapons in hand. “The goddesses required my presence longer than I expected.” “Our emperor needs not to apologize to us,” Ingrid replied courteously. “Our lives and nights are spent at your leisure.” Her mother proved more inquisitive. “If memory serves, the goddesses never kept an emperor for so long,” she pointed out. “I assume this New Fire Ceremony will be different from its predecessors?” You have no idea. Although… maybe she does have a clue. I can never tell with her. “We’ve reached the end of the fifty-two-year cycle,” I reminded her. “Exceptional times call for exceptional rites.” “I will consider myself lucky to witness them then,” Lady Sigrun mused with a smile and calculating eyes. “Our emperor’s reign is unlike any of those that came before.” “The goddesses have recognized his exceptional destiny,” Ingrid flattered me. “Will our Lord Emperor eat with us?” “I am too tired for it,” I confessed. Or to do anything else, truthfully. “Maybe after I rest.” “Perhaps my mother and I can help you with that,” Ingrid replied coyly. “Let her massage your body while I soothe your soul to sleep with sweet songs.” Recognizing the hidden suggestion for what it was, I lightly kissed Ingrid on the lips. The taste of her warm skin let me forget Yoloxochitl’s cold touch. “I would appreciate a lullaby,” I said. “And to wake up with you at my side.” “Always,” Ingrid replied courteously. At this point, we played the role of happy newlyweds perfectly. A minute later, I was resting naked on my bed with my face against the pillow. Lady Sigrun climbed on my back to massage it while her daughter began to play a tune on the harp. The beautiful melody echoed in my chambers, with only the three of us and the silent masked guards to enjoy it. I could almost forget my troubles. Almost. Whenever my eyelids threatened to close and lull me to sleep, I saw a sulfur flame flaring in the dark. “Is that fear I sense in your flesh, my emperor?” Lady Sigrun whispered as her soft hands traveled across my back and elbows. Her daughter’s song drowned out our discussion in its joyful chorus. “Your spine is straight and your flesh tight. What frightens you so much?” That horror in the sulfur flame. “Disappointing the goddesses,” I lied. “A fear all men share.” She traced a line along my spine. “But today’s dread runs deeper.” I was starting to wonder if she could read minds. “How are you so perceptive, Lady Sigrun?” “Lifelong practice and a deep understanding of human nature.” She began to massage my shoulders. “You will not enjoy the former, but you might develop the latter. You show the potential for it.” I hoped so. I still remained a student in the presence of a master. “Do you know what these guards are?” I asked Lady Sigrun while glancing at our silent observers. Between their silence and eerie stillness, they might as well be made of stone rather than flesh. “Are you certain the song will drown out our voices?” “So long as we keep our voices low,” my concubine replied with a hushed tone. “Even then, I do not believe these creatures are capable of speaking. They are no more than puppets of flesh without intelligence.” She didn’t think they were alive anymore either. “What do you think they hide beneath their helmets?” Lady Sigrun’s smile had a sinister edge to it. “Nothing.” I was tempted to check for myself, but I had my fill of horrors for tonight. “I must admit I am impressed, Lord Iztac.” Lady Sigrun sounded genuinely respectful, but she was such a liar that I could hardly tell whether or not she meant it. “When we first met, I thought you would be rather forgettable.” “Forgettable?” I scoffed. “What does that mean?” “I have shared the bed of nearly two dozen emperors before you,” Lady Sigrun said as she continued to massage me. “Many were brave and ambitious, a handful were cunning, some were cowardly… but very few were noteworthy. You can count yourself among that number.” I smiled as a surge of pleasure traveled through my shoulders. Lady Sigrun had found a sore spot to soothe. “Did you flatter all my predecessors?” “Yes,” Lady Sigrun replied with a light chuckle. “But I rarely meant it.” And I knew better than to take her at her word. “Now…” Lady Sigrun leaned down to whisper into my ear. “About that book you mentioned earlier…” “I have the second volume,” I replied with a low tone, going straight for the kill. Ingrid subtly started playing a bit more aggressively to better cover our voices. “Not on myself, of course.” “Of course,” Lady Sigrun repeated like a trained songbird. “What proof do I have that you speak true?” “I can memorize and recite passages, if you’d like.” “I would like to see that,” Lady Sigrun replied. “How did you even find this document?” A dog god fetched it for me. “I cannot reveal my source.” “I assume it is the same one that whispers well-kept secrets in your ears?” Sigrun studied my face, looking for a sign that she had guessed right. I let nothing through. “Why are you interested in these codices, my emperor?” “Why are you?” I replied. Lady Sigrun laughed lightly. “Knowledge without power is worthless, but power without knowledge is blind. Only those who understand the past can hope to shape the future.” In short, she hoped to use these codices as leverage to gain power and influence in the future. How crafty and farsighted! Or at least, that was what she wanted to believe. Besides the valuable information kept within the codices—intel that would help me navigate the Land of the Dead Suns—I wondered if the First Emperor had encoded spells within them; sorcery I could use against his treacherous brood. I suspected Lady Sigrun sought the secret power contained within those pages too. I was certain that she practiced a form of witchcraft right under the Nightlords’ noses, even though she was no Nahualli. For now, I would play the fool. It would take time to uncover her secrets. “I share your opinion, Lady Sigrun,” I said, hiding my suspicion under a veil of caution. “I am curious as to how my empire was founded.” “So am I.” Now that she had finished with the shoulders, Sigrun began to massage my thighs. “You know the official history is a lie. Otherwise, we wouldn’t be hiding this conversation.” I snorted. “What is true in this cursed place?” “Little, hence why truth is so precious.” She moved on to massage my arms. I felt relaxed, healthier, and better than before. “I would gladly collaborate with you to complete the full codex.” “How many volumes do you have?” “Mazatl only has a translated copy of the first volume. I can arrange to smuggle it into the palace, though only if you can return the favor with the second.” We’d already started negotiating. “I could transcribe my volume to paper,” I said. “But it will be difficult to do so unnoticed. The walls have eyes as well as ears.” Lady Sigrun’s hands rested on my shoulders, her lips moving closer to my ear. “Do you desire me, my emperor?” The sensual way she said it sent a shiver of pleasure down my spine. “What does that have to do with the matter at hand?” “In my homeland, it is customary for men to write songs and poems to the women they desire… especially in our runic language.” Lady Sigrun caressed my left cheek, causing blood to flush to it. It seemed to amuse her. “I could teach it to you.” A code. She was offering to teach me how to code messages between us. “Shouldn’t I direct songs toward your daughter?” I mused while glancing at Ingrid. My consort appeared fully focused on her performance. If she could hear our conversation, she hid it well. “You should.” Lady Sigrun stroked my hair. “But I would appreciate a few for myself.” I looked over my shoulder and studied her smile. I could interpret it in so many ways. A subtle invitation to pay more attention to her for the sake of her image; a suggestion on how to lower suspicion; and a hook meant to further charm me. “Has Tlaxcala bribed you yet?” I asked suddenly, testing the waters. “He has,” Lady Sigrun confirmed. “He gave me beautiful jewels.” I held her gaze. “Perhaps you should put them on by the time I wake up.” A flash of amusement passed over her gaze. “If my emperor insists.” I knew it. She was teasing me. It might have worked on many other men, but I knew better than to buy into it. Lady Sigrun wanted to worm her way into my heart so she could obtain a better deal for herself than the one I currently offered. My discovery of the volumes had raised my appeal from a potential puppet to a dangerous ally. She meant to tame me. Should I pretend to fall for it? Let her think she could cast me under her spell the way I had blinded others with the Veil so that she would lower her guard? Or would she respect me more if I rejected her advances? What would give me better negotiating power? These questions coursed through my mind, but I was too tired to consider them. The massage and lullaby had worked. I let out a yawn. I was too tired for sex, too tired for thought, too tired to worry. I closed my eyes, and the darkness claimed me. Something was wrong. I felt it the moment sleep seized my mind. I had descended into the Land of the Dead Suns many times. I knew what to expect. The darkness, the cold, the dulling of my senses as my soul left its body of flesh to descend into the realm of the dead. The journey was akin to a gentle fall into the water. This time, I encountered an obstacle. Something viscous and slimy stuck to the feathers of my soul. A sick, pale fog swelled around me, filling my nostrils with the stench of rot and death. I couldn’t see an inch ahead of me, but I could feel the tendrils catching me. My first instinct was to transform into my Tonalli form, which I did. My arms twisted into wings and my legs into talons, only for the bindings to tighten their hold on me. I struggled against invisible tendrils sticking to my back and limbs. What was happening?! “How droll,” I heard a soft, soothing voice whisper in the mist. “A bird caught in a web.” I immediately activated the Gaze spell, the sunlight of my soul clearing the mists and unveiling the trap in which I had landed. I was in a cavern of some kind, with smooth obsidian walls and no exits of any kind. A colossal spider’s web covered every surface, its spinning strands holding the dusty bones of men and beasts alike in midair. I mistook them for silk for an instant, until I realized their texture matched another substance. Hair. I had landed in a web of human hair. “Is that fear that I smell, owl-fiend?” The voice from earlier taunted me with a tone as soothing as whistling leaves. “Struggle as much as you like. I rather enjoy it.” “Show yourself, coward!” I shouted back in defiance, looking around while struggling to escape the sticky strands keeping me bound. “Face me, if you dare!” A drop of liquid fell a few inches to my left, melting away a strand. “Look above you, little bird.” I did. A monstrous spider, three times the size of a trihorn, loomed over me, bloated and corpse-like. The arachnid immediately reminded me of the creature I had slain on my way to Mictlan, but bigger, meaner, and even more grotesque. Its eight spindly legs ended in clawed hands large enough to hold and crush a man within their clawed fingers. Whereas the beast I had once killed lacked any eyes, this festering mass of flesh and chalky fur had too many of them. Dozens of slimy, dark orbs as black as midnight gathered in clusters all over its body. Most terrifying of all was its face. Green bile dripped from its razor sharp fangs under a skeletal and all too human visage. Eight empty eye sockets lay where the forehead should have been. Festering white worms emerged from them, their maws circular rows of fangs. The monster appeared to be as undead as the rest of the Underworld’s denizens, but the yellow life-fire burning in its thorax said otherwise. Its vital glow nearly rivaled mine. This monster was as alive as I was, a soul from the living world visiting the dead at night. A Nahualli. “Tzahualli,” I guessed, shocked beyond words. “You are a Tzahualli. A spider-totem.” “A knowledgeable fellow.” A tongue slithered from between the creature’s fangs and licked them. “Good. A cultured mind makes for excellent soul seasoning.” “But you were all destroyed,” I replied, trying to buy time with words while I figured a way out of this mess. This monster oozed malevolence, and I doubted it would stop for a friendly chat. “King Mictlantecuhtli wiped your kind out from the first layer!” “That is true,” the creature said, almost joyfully. “But we are not on the first layer, my sweet food. We are on the threshold, trapped before the Gate of Skulls in a lair of my design. The dead king’s hand cannot grab us here.” If so, then I couldn’t hope for a rescue. I turned my Gaze around, looking for an escape. This cavern had no hole to fly through, no door to open, no entry of any kind. How did I even fall into this web at all? This is not a normal space. I did not let my thoughts distract me from my attempts at escaping the web. Unfortunately, the more I struggled, the stronger the strands became. I might be able to cut them with the doll spell, but my captor would know immediately. Spiders can sense even the most subtle vibrations in their web. I need to get this monster closer. I won’t have two chances to take it by surprise. Thankfully for me, the Tzahualli appeared so certain of its victory that it allowed itself a moment to brag. “Under normal circumstances, I would have hunted down you in the waking world,” the spider said. “Alas for you, I found your soul less guarded than your body. The price paid for your head more than covered the risks involved.” “The price?” The wording gave me pause. “You were paid to attack me?” “Nothing personal, sweetie. I am what you could call a hired hunter.” The spider laughed sinisterly. “My employer should arrive sometime soon to confirm your demise.” I had guessed the sponsor’s identity long before it materialized next to the spider. The tumi that had haunted me the night before appeared in a flash of light, its radiance illuminating the dark cavern and banishing what fog my previous spell hadn’t cleared. The golden mask floated down closer to me with glowing eyes. I stared back at it with Gaze. Some said eyes were the mirror of the soul. They were right. A humanoid reflection stared back at me through the tumi—a desiccated skeleton with gilded bones shining as bright as the sun and clothed in regal robes of woven silver. Sharpened rubies replaced the teeth and two emeralds replaced the eyes. Great, feathered black wings sprouted from its shoulders. A white ruff surrounded the neck, while the head of a bird I did not recognize sat atop the skull. A dark red comb sat atop the head like a crown. “Do you know who I am, oh Emperor of Blood and Darkness?” The male voice coming from the tumi was high-pitched, like a distant echo resonating through old mountains. “Say my name, thrall to death, if you dare.” “You are Inkarri,” I said with a glare. I had tried to gain his attention for a while, and my wish had finally been granted. “An Apu and Mallquis of the Sapa people.” “That I am. The light that guards the mountains, for this night and all the nights to come. The condor king that protects the holy land of the Sapa.” The gilded reflection raised a finger at me. “Which you wish to despoil with war and murder.” “For a greater cause!” I argued, pointing at my chest. “Look upon the bindings on my heart and the chains that hold my life-fire!” “A thrall to the dark, that is what you are,” the Mallquis replied with contempt. “Guilty of deception and instigating war!” “A war I will do my best to lose!” My outburst took Inkarri aback. Since the spider had made no move to attack, I figured I still had a chance to parlay. “I seek to destroy the Nightlords too, and for that, I have to sow discord among their ranks,” I explained. “A war will present the perfect opportunity to weaken the sisters’ armies from within. We share the same objective, you and I. To destroy those four demons who would make us food.” “And we would have been ready to welcome them properly in due time, were it not for your treachery,” Inkarri replied, unconvinced. “Now the Nightlords strike when we are most vulnerable, unprepared, divided.” “But you will have an ally in the highest echelons of your enemy’s high command.” Which should more than make up for the Sapa’s internal divisions. “We could collaborate. I can give you troop information and help set traps to destroy the sisters⁠—” The Mallquis interrupted me with a sinister rattle. “You would help us win the war you started?” he asked. “You expect me to believe you, a warlock who deluded his masters and subjects alike? Not even for a noble cause, but for selfish survival?” “I did it for both.” This discussion wasn’t going well. Then again, it didn’t start well either. “I have no desire to feed the Nightlords’ hunger, but their destruction shall free our respective people from their threat. Starting a war offered the best odds to do both.” Green flames glowed in the reflection’s emerald eyes. “You traded the certainty of my homeland’s suffering for your potential survival.” “Yes, I have.” I would shoulder that sin. “I fought back the best I could with the tools granted to me. What is done is done, though I take no joy in it.” “What makes my people’s lives less valuable than yours?” The Mallquis could hear me, but he clearly did not listen. “I have felt the tremors of the land as it shudders in dread, the howling wind that whispers of a coming calamity, the warnings of the stars. Your reign heralds an age of darkness where the deathless bats feast supreme. It cannot end any quicker.” “It will end quicker if we work together,” I pointed out. “Indeed.” Inkarri’s tumi floated back as if disgusted by my mere existence. “It shall end tonight.” I squinted and quickly cast a Veil spell around me. The more we spoke, the more I realized my words were wasted on Inkarri. The Mallquis had already made up his mind. “We Sapa have tried to slay the emperors for countless moons,” Inkarri said. “No sorcery could put them down for good. The flesh can die, but so long as the soul remains chained, the Nightlords can always recreate a receptacle to house it. Their sleeping souls did not fall through the Land of the Dead Suns either… until now.” “Killing me will change nothing,” I argued one last time, still hoping for a peaceful solution, “and cost you an asset.” “I think not,” the Mallquis said. “If you die here, Tlacatecolotl, your soul shall be wiped clean from the Underworld. Not even the vampires’ wicked progenitor will be able to recover your extinguished Teyolia. Your vile spirit will cease to be, and your body will become an empty husk unfit for the altar. The Nightlords will be too busy trying to salvage this disaster to wage war on my people. The chain of sacrifice will finally shatter, and the vile empire on which it rests along with it.” “Then it is settled,” the spider said. The drooling Tzahualli had clearly been struggling to hold back its hunger. “I shall feed on your still pulsing Teyolia.” “Yes.” The tumi turned its attention back on me. “If you truly fight to end the Nightlords’ terror and return the light of hope to the world, wicked emperor, then offer thyself to nothingness.” Calling upon the power within my Teyolia, I triggered the Doll spell and cloaked it in a Veil. Talons of darkness erupted from my chest, invisible to the eyes of the Tzahualli and tumi alike. The latter descended closer to me, its legs trembling with giddiness. “How much?” I asked. “How much?” the spider replied. “How much did this ghost pay you for this dirty deed?” I asked, waiting for the assassin to come closer. “I’ll give you twice the amount if you eat him.” The tumi let out a rattle. “Do not trust nor underestimate this foul villain,” he advised his chosen assassin. “He is a powerful warlock. Finish him off now.” “Now, now, no need to rush anything,” the spider said. Unlike its employer, its arrogance blinded him to the danger ahead. “Do you have two divine Teyolias to offer, owl-fiend? Otherwise, I’m afraid no meal will satisfy my gourmet tastes better than your own hea⁠—” Invisible talons of darkness gutted it. Thick yellow blood sprayed upon my feathers from above. A surprised gargle of pain followed, the Tzahualli desperately covering a gashing wound below its head with its spidery legs so as not to bleed out. I had hoped to decapitate the monster in one swift stroke, the same way I had torn my own guards in half earlier, but it was too big and too strong. The best I could do was distract it. “Here is your answer, condor king,” I told the surprised tumi. “The very same I had given the Nightlords when they decided to sacrifice me.” I immediately turned my Doll spell against the strands binding me. My shadow talons shredded them apart, freeing my body from its sticky chains. My wings flapped with the strength of a mighty gust that sent the tumi flying backward. “I refuse.” These two had made the same mistake as all the others. They had underestimated me. The furious Tzahualli let out a roar and fell upon me with all its weight and mass. But now that I was no longer bound, I flew away more swiftly. Though every inch of the cavern’s walls was covered in web, I had enough space to maneuver. “It is true that I want the Nightlords to perish,” I said, “but I would rather live to see it.” I would not die on anybody’s altar. Not a vampire’s, nor a spider’s. No one would feed on me. No one. I had no guarantee my death would end anything either. The Nightlords had six hundred years to refine their ritual. My demise might cause them some trouble, but I doubted that it would cause Yohuachanca to collapse on itself. If I were to die, it would be on my own terms. My resistance left the Mallquis unmoved. “You shall not survive that long,” he warned me before barking orders to his assassin. “Destroy him.” “Gladly,” the Tzahualli rasped through the blood pouring from its fangs. It leapt at me with strength and speed belying its immense size. I avoided a fatal collision, but it managed to grab one of my talons with its dirty hands. Its claws closed on mine with a grip strong enough to shatter stone. I was strong, but not enough to carry a beast over three times my size. The Tzahualli pushed us down toward the cave’s bottom, where it could hold me at its leisure. It tried to catch my wings with another of its hands the same way its kind’s dead spawn had tried to on my journey to Mictlan, its fangs out and ready to bite. It might have worked had I not been trained in using the Doll spell. My shadow talons stabbed the monster’s hand and severed it from its body. With no bird to hold onto, the spider fell to the bottom of its lair with a loud crash. This creature is no sorcerer. It seemed unprepared for my spells. Of course, it couldn’t be a warlock. Its kind had been banished from the Land of the Dead Suns and it never faced a foe that could fight back. The body is strong, but the mind is weak. “If you had any bravery, coward, you would have come to fight me yourself!” I snarled at the tumi. “Or confronted the Nightlords before I forced your hand!” “I do what I must so that my descendants may live,” the tumi replied while conveniently floating out of my reach. “Such is a Mallquis’s duty. To endure deathlessness for the sake of the living.” How quick were immortals willing to sacrifice lives other than their own? I might be walking the same path, but at least I did not pretend to be more righteous than I was. I ignored the tumi and focused back on the spider below. If Inkarri could intervene to support his assassin, he would have already. “I have your scent, fool,” the Tzahualli said as it prepared to jump at me again. “No matter where you run, I shall track you.” “Who said anything about running?” I replied. I was done fleeing and hiding. But to kill this creature’s body, I had to crush its spirit first. To do that, I called upon the Veil spell and cloaked myself in a fresh memory. My feathers burned with illusory sulfur and darkness surged from my Teyolia. I pushed back against the weight of the monster’s disbelief to shock it with a vision of the creature I had seen in the Nightlords’ flame. When I opened my mouth, my spell changed my words into a dreadful curse. Ģ̵̙̹̜͚͙͑͌̌̅̒̋́̎͘͘͝i̷̛͕̯̗̥̬̙̪̭͕̲͎̦̫͋̏́̐̈́͜ͅṿ̴̡̞̲͖͋̄͆̍̉̓̾̕͜͝͝ę̸̭̹̙̪̺̯̏̉̅̒̀̑͗̈́͐͊̋ ̵̢̏̈̂͑͌̎m̸̨͕͓̲̄̿͂͂́͘è̶̢̨̳͙̞̺̯̤͉͔͊̕͝͠ ̴̢̳̬̩̙̹͙̣͓͚̬̉́͛y̸̠͖̋̃͛̑̀́̿͌ȯ̷̢͍̰̳̯͎͎̰͓̓͒̍͆̃̿̔̔̍̏͝u̶̗͎̹̙̞̅̔̋̽̄̽̈́͆̇̿̔̚r̴̼̱̰̬̯̠̃̃̈͛͠ ̷̥͇̠̱̳̪̈́̒̍̈́͑̀̽͋͆̐̀̋͊͆͜͝ş̷̹͈͚̘̣͔͍̈́̂̏̍̐̏̈͊̓͗̋͠ͅͅo̴̜͓͚̠͖̺̬͈̺͕̼̳͎͈̅̈̔͆̓̒̀͂͐u̴̡͚̩͕̩̾̓̄̅͋̇̉̀͝l̷͚͐̐̇͒!̷̳̤̥̲̠͈̺̘̭̒̅̾́ Whereas I had faced a god without blinking, my foe did not show the same bravery. The Tzahualli screeched in fear and turned its back on me. It rushed into a corner of the cavern, perhaps looking for a hole to crawl in. That was the opening I waited for. I swooped in from above and tackled its back with all my strength and viciousness. My owl instincts, exacerbated by my divine heart-fire, guided my claws. Unlike this foolish spider, I did not play with my food. The bird within me was a hunter, a stalker in the night. I went straight for the kill. The Tzahualli’s Teyolia shone within its arachnid thorax, protected by humanoid ribs. My Doll spell unleashed ephemeral talons that split them open with a fearsome crack. It was only now that I realized how strong the spell was in close combat. Once I focused my power and will, I could crush stone and bend metal. The power of my soul trumped many times what my own hands could achieve. The Tzahualli thrashed and fought back in despair, but I held on to him with persistence and cleaved his back apart. His heart lay exposed to me. Like a crow tearing out a piece of flesh from a corpse, my beak extracted the Teyolia from its receptacle. The Tzahualli screeched in pain and agony, its soulbound scream reverberating through its web. The cavern’s walls cracked and shattered like glass. Whatever totemic magic that held its existence in place came to an end. The ground collapsed beneath us, and we swiftly crashed onto a stand of fossilized bones. I heard hundreds of voices let out cries of fear and surprise while our impact raised a cloud of ashen dust. I flapped my wings to clear it, revealing familiar crowds of undead. The Market of Years. We had crashed through the frontier between worlds and manifested back where I had woken up. The tumi had vanished from sight. All that remained were its servant’s dead remains beneath my feet. “Poor choice of assassin,” I whispered as the Teyolia I had captured dissipated on its own. Death had claimed this hunter. The next one would be more dangerous. This assassination attempt had clearly been a rushed job, a desperate measure to slay me before my armies could mobilize. Inkarri had sacrificed preparation for the sake of expediency, selecting a tool unfit for the challenge. Though I relished my victory, I knew it was mostly meaningless. Inkarri remained safely out of my reach, and tonight’s debacle had cost him nothing. If anything, he had learned not to underestimate me anymore. He would make a second attempt—a deadlier one. Mictlan was no longer my sanctuary. I had to leave. part0029. 24WELCOME HOME Word of my ambush spread quickly. The dead did not waste anything. By the night’s end, a new stand made from the Tzahualli’s remains would join the Market of Years. However, I had no idea what kind of goods someone would sell within the bones of a giant spider-totem’s corpse. Trinkets made from dead bugs? Clothes made from colored webs? Or perhaps Huehuecoyotl would repurpose it into a new attraction? That coyote had a flair for the dramatic. In any case, Queen Mictecacihuatl swiftly arrived once she was alerted to the commotion. Much like her husband, she seemed aware of anything happening within Mictlan’s walls at any time. The presence of a Tzahualli, even a dead one, probably invited her full and immediate attention. “That was a brazen attempt,” the queen said after she listened to my tale. “I suspected a few Tzahualli lurk in the lower layers, but it bothers me to hear one is still stalking the land of the living.” “That one won’t harm the dead anymore, at least,” I replied. “You have my gratitude for this. Those consumed by the Tzahualli are denied an afterlife. You have avenged many souls and preserved others yet to come.” Queen Mictecacihuatl looked up at the Land of the Dead Suns’ stone ceiling. “Still, I cannot help but wonder if there are others active among their kind. If one has survived our purge, why not more?” I feared as much. Inkarri must have recruited the spider-totem who would let him organize this ambush the quickest. He would certainly be able to secure contracts with a more competent Tzahualli and organize another ambush in time. “Is there any way to avoid a similar trap?” I asked the goddess. When the Queen of the Dead paused for a brief moment, I already knew the answer would be a firm “no.” “Violence is forbidden within these walls and shall not be tolerated. If your enemy attempts to slay you here, he shall suffer my wrath. However, your foes are correct. Neither my king’s reach nor mine extends to souls trapped on the threshold between life and death. Otherwise, I would have helped your predecessors pass on properly.” “Are there no spells to prevent them from intercepting me? A Veil that could hide my descent into the Underworld?” “Not to my knowledge. The passage between life and death always shows the soul at its most vulnerable. Your Teyolia is like a candle in the night, easy to track for those who can see in the dark.” The Queen joined her skeletal hands together. “There is another possibility, child, albeit with its own harsh cost.” “Moving into Tlalocan,” I guessed. She had already suggested a similar scenario to escape the tumi’s surveillance. “That would be the easiest solution,” the goddess confirmed. “Once you cross into the second layer, your soul will skip the first layer once you fall asleep. Instead of crossing the Gate of Skulls that separates the land of the living from our realm, your spirit will instead pass through my husband’s everwatching gaze. No spider will be able to catch you mid-fall, because they will not know in which layer you would land; and if they try to find out, my king’s hand shall squash them.” A thought I relished immensely. “However, I must remind you that Tlalocan is a perilous place,” Queen Mictecacihuatl said. “There is no sanctuary to be found under its rain of fire, no city of the dead to offer you peace and repose. The dangers you will find there might exceed those your foes up above can come up with.” “Perhaps, but I can prepare for Tlalocan’s dangers, while Inkarri’s attacks will always come as a surprise to me.” I let out a sigh. “It seems I will have to move deeper earlier than expected.” A true shame. I had grown to enjoy Mictlan over the nights I spent within its rattling walls. As odd as it sounded, a city of honest corpses felt more welcoming than a luxurious palace full of servants and traitors. It helped me escape the Nightlords’ grasp and that nagging, constant sensation of danger. Mictlan helped me breathe. Without it as an escape for my troubles above, my life in the waking world would only grow wearier. I could tell. Queen Mictecacihuatl gave me a look of pure compassion. She had sensed my distress. “I am truly sorry, Iztac. If I could offer more help, I would.” “You have already helped me more than you can imagine, oh kind Queen of the Dead.” My heart overflowed with gratitude. “You have shown me more compassion than most of my own kind, and your wise advice helped guide me in troubled times. I shall not forget it.” “I shall not forget you either, Iztac. You will always be welcome in Mictlan.” Her gaze lingered on my chest. “However, I feel great doom stands between you and your eternal rest.” “Nothing escapes you, Your Majesty.” I hoped she could offer one last piece of advice before I continued my descent into Tlalocan. “A sulfur flame burns in my palace.” Queen Mictecacihuatl listened attentively as I recounted last night’s tale. How the Nightlords’ ritual led to the creation of a smokeless fire connected to an ancient and primordial horror. Having existed since the dawn of life, I doubted the goddess of death could feel fear. And yet… the way her flayed flesh tensed up as I recounted my tale did not escape me. I couldn’t tell if it was out of anger, annoyance, or another human emotion, but my story definitely unsettled her. I took it as a dire warning. Queen Mictecacihuatl was as old as the first humanity and watched the world end four times across countless eons. She had welcomed my pleas to travel into the depths of the Underworld and defeat the Nightlords with compassion, but never personal concern. Whatever my captors had planned bothered the very architects of the cosmos. “Do you know how the fifth sun came about, Iztac?” the goddess finally asked me, breaking the silence. “Only the Yohuachancan myth,” I replied after recovering my composure. A tale I already knew to be deceitful. “When the fourth world came to an end, the great Yohuachanca, the First Emperor, offered a covenant to mankind. He would sacrifice himself to become the fifth sun and return light to the world, but in exchange, mortals would have to sacrifice their blood to keep him and his descendants fed.” “A lie inspired by the truth, but a lie nonetheless,” the queen commented. “The truth, as you no doubt suspect, is very different. I was fortunate enough to witness the momentous occasion with my own eyes.” I nodded sharply and listened in respectful silence. The goddess paused for a short moment, gathering her thoughts, before revealing to me the secret tale of creation. “Long before Yohuachanca arose to dominate the land, the gods gathered after the demise of the fourth humanity,” Queen Mictecacihuatl explained to me. “My husband argued against the recreation of life, as he always does whenever the world is remade.” It didn’t surprise me. King Mictlantecuhtli had never been alive and considered death to be the true state of existence. “Quetzalcoatl stole the bones of the dead to create a new incarnation of mankind, but there was no sun to illuminate the darkness.” The goddess waved her hand at the fire in my chest. “To ignite a sun, a god must give up their Teyolia, their heart-fire. Even among the divine, few possess a strong enough flame to achieve this feat. Of the celestial host, only two gods proved worthy candidates—proud and mighty Tecciztecatl, son of Tlaloc and Chalchiuhtlicue, born of two suns and with the arrogance to match his origins; and humble Nanahuatzin, who had suffered a life of hardship, poverty, and misery yet gained a strong will from it.” “I’ve never heard of either of these gods,” I confessed. “The vampires erased word of their existence, as they try to extinguish mine,” Queen Mictecacihuatl replied before returning to her tale. “Tecciztecatl volunteered for the task because he believed it an honor; Nanahuatzin, because he thought it was his duty.” I had heard similar folktales often enough to guess how it would turn out. “We gods gathered at the apex of a stillborn world and lit a great bonfire atop a mountain. Tecciztecatl and Nanahuatzin were asked to step forward and sacrifice their most valuable possessions to the flames. The former gave rich offerings of gold, jade, and coral; the latter could only offer his own blood. It was decided that strong and noble Tecciztecatl would become the new sun, while Nanahuatzin would become his moon and assistant. Tecciztecatl was asked to jump into the bonfire so that his Teyolia might rise from it and ascend into the sky.” “But he did not,” I guessed. This always happened in the priests’ stories, who loved to condemn the proud and rebellious to better exalt the humble and dutiful. “He proved unfit for the task.” “He did.” Queen Mictecacihuatl let out a laugh. “Four times, Tecciztecatl tried to jump into the sacred fire. Four times, he recoiled upon sensing the searing heat on his skin. Tecciztecatl had never tasted pain before, and now he learned to fear it. The gods were disappointed, none more than Tecciztecatl’s parents, who had both made the ultimate sacrifice without hesitation. After their son’s fourth failure, they called upon Nanahuatzin.” The goddess’s tale paused for a short while. “Do you know what his name means, Iztac?” I nodded. “Nanahuatzin means ‘full of sores.’ It is a cruel name.” “Nanahuatzin lived up to it. He was born so deformed that his godly parents abandoned him, and he lived an existence of shunned misery. Though kind Xochiquetzal adopted him, he had few friends; chief among them were my faithful Xolotl, noble Quetzalcoatl, and his cunning brother Tezcatlipoca. But his pain had taught him resolve, and the little kindness he received showed him the value of life. When he was called to the bonfire, Nanahuatzin did not even hesitate before jumping in.” Was that respect I detected in the queen’s voice? “You sound like you admire him, oh goddess.” “I do,” Queen Mictecacihuatl replied with fondness. “The living forget acts of valor quickly, but we dead ones remember them forever.” Coming from a goddess as old as time, that was high praise. “I cannot boast of raising a sun into the sky,” I said, “but I hope to become as worthy of remembrance as Nanahuatzin one day.” “You do remind me of him, Iztac,” the goddess said with a small chuckle. “Nurture your inner strength, child. Bravery does not rise from magic or power, but from one’s resolve in the face of suffering.” I thought over the lesson and offered a nod of appreciation. The goddess continued her tale soon after. “Tecciztecatl was so shamed and humiliated that he immediately followed his rival into the bonfire to prove himself,” she said. “Soon two lights rose in the sky, each a reflection of the gods who gave them life—Nanahuatzin, who sacrificed himself out of bravery, ascended as the fifth sun; Tecciztecatl, who gave his life out of wounded pride, became the moon. The remaining lesser gods thus gave their Teyolia to fuel the wind and give movement to the stars. They sacrificed themselves to breathe life into the cosmos. Now mortals have taken upon that duty.” “Mortals?” My gaze wandered to my chest, where my Teyolia burned. The dead only had darkness between their ribs. “Is this linked to our heart-fires?” “Very sharp, Iztac. Yes indeed. When a mortal dies, whether man or beast, their Teyolia ascends to fuel the fifth sun while their Tonalli goes on to rest in the Underworld.” This meant that by devouring both, vampires did worse than prevent the dead from enjoying their afterlife. They slowly starved the sun of power and threatened the universe’s very stability. They were an infection, cursing life itself. “This is a heartfelt tale, Your Majesty, and I thank you for sharing it with me,” I said, albeit with some confusion. I believed the queen told me the unblemished truth—she had witnessed these events in person after all—but their significance escaped me. “However, how does it relate to the Nightlords’ sulfur flame?” She answered me with another question. “Why do mortals create statues of the gods and give them offerings?” “Because they hope to establish contact through them,” I replied with confidence. That was why Queen Mictecacihuatl needed a priestess to run the Day of the Dead ritual. The latter would serve as her anchor in the living world. “We gods have power over our representations and representatives,” the goddess confirmed. “But the reverse is also true.” It took me a moment to realize the magnitude of her statement. “Acts visited upon your representations affect you?” It beggared understanding. “But… that’s not possible. If so, then any statue’s destruction would harm you.” “Most gods are so powerful that symbolic acts rarely affect them much. The destruction of my temples and statues left me disturbed, but it did not shackle my power.” The goddess met my gaze, the ghostly hue in her empty eyes reminding me of the sulfur flame’s radiance. “However, a symbolic ritual, complex and thoroughly repeated, might eventually weaken my very essence.” A shiver ran through my spine as I connected the dots. The Scarlet Moon. “I am the First Emperor incarnate, or so the red-eyed priests say,” I muttered under my breath, horrified. “They affect him through me. Like a doll burned to curse the one it represents.” “You play the role of your land’s founder, who ascended to divinity as the god of pain and hunger,” Queen Mictecacihuatl whispered, her tone as haunting as a skull rattling in its tomb. “You are wed to four consorts, who each stand as the living reflections of the people your captors used to be. You all play at being the emperor and masters of the realm, until one night these four living women are devoured by the vampires they were fated to become. Your captors then proceed to ritually tear apart the living incarnation of their divine father.” A rehearsal. The Scarlet Moon was a rehearsal. The echo of an ancient crime kept alive and meant to entomb the past. A betrayal which the Nightlords repeated each year on their father’s precious human doll. Which meant that the New Fire Ceremony represented a similar ritual. One targeted not at the First Emperor but at Nanahuatzin. At the sun. At the sun. They’re… insane. I had thought Yoloxochitl was the only madwoman among the Nightlords, but now I realized that all four sisters were completely and utterly mad. They spent over six hundred years refining a ritual aimed at the sun on which all mortal life relied on. Insane. What could they hope to accomplish? Extinguish the sun and enshroud the universe in eternal darkness? It would kill the very humans on which those leeches relied on to feed! Certainly even the likes of the Jaguar Woman realized that! “Why?!” I begged Queen Mictecacihuatl for an answer, my voice breaking from the creeping dread and disbelief. “Why?! What could they hope to accomplish?!” “I cannot say what the vampires plan to do,” the queen replied, her voice heavy with concern. “But the place that you people call Smoke Mountain is where we once raised the fifth sun. It cannot be a coincidence.” No, it could not. This did not reassure me at all. The Nightlords had spent centuries rehearsing a parody of the world’s creation, until at last a cursed god of hunger and hatred blessed their vile enterprise. I tried to calm down, telling myself I still had days to stop whatever they planned. I had time to think it through. Precious little time. I replayed the New Fire Ceremony in my mind, searching for any detail that might help the Queen of the Dead enlighten me. “Drain,” I muttered twice, once a mere hush, another a firmer word. “They said they would ‘drain’ power from the flame. Were they talking about the flow of Teyolia?” Were they trying to rob the sun of its own sustenance? To my sorrow, the goddess had no more answers than me. “I cannot say, Iztac,” she said, her flayed skin tense as a bowstring. “However, the danger is real. Like the moon and the tides, the cosmos follows a cycle where magic ebbs and flows. The cosmos is at its most malleable on the last five days of a fifty-two-year cycle, for this is the moment when the power of chaos is at its apex. Usually impossible feats of sorcery become possible on that date.” There were no curse words strong enough to answer that revelation. I wasn’t blind to the goddess’s worries. She couldn’t tell what the Nightlords planned to do at the ceremony’s conclusion, but what mattered was that they might succeed. I must stop it. My hands were shaking, my fiery blood now colder than winter snow. No matter the cost, no matter its aims, I had to stop that ritual. Not only for my sake but that of the world itself. “The fifth sun shall be the last your kin shall see, Iztac.” The goddess marked a short pause heavy with finality. “The gods have all sacrificed their Teyolia so that the current world might live. Should the current sun be extinguished, no one shall step up to raise its successor.” As if I didn’t have enough weight on my shoulders as it was! “Can’t you stop it?!” I dared snap at Queen Mictecacihuatl, too fearful and frustrated. “You are a goddess, a real goddess! Surely this situation warrants your intervention!” “I have no dominion over the living world,” she reminded me, her voice oozing sorrow. “But I do! I can travel between worlds!” I knelt before her. “Trade me the power to break this ritual before it’s too late! I shall give thee my flesh and soul if I must!” Queen Mictecacihuatl bristled. “You know not what you ask.” “I do!” This situation went far beyond my personal salvation. The Nightlords’ ritual might threaten the world and the very existence of mankind as a whole. “Don’t you have more spells to give?! More secret strength to lend?!” “I have given you all the help I could provide, more than you know.” The goddess shook her head and let out a rattle of pure regret. “There exist laws that have bound me since the dawn of time. I am powerful, that is true. But I am not free to do as I please.” I opened my mouth to argue further… when the queen avoided my gaze. There were gestures so simple that, coming from the right person, carried more weight than mountains. Queen Mictecacihuatl was the first woman to ever die, a goddess only two generations removed from the universe’s origin. She commanded all souls who had ever perished. Yet she avoided a mortal’s gaze. Out of shame. Out of sorrow. Out of frustration. The gesture took the wind out of my sails. The goddess wanted to help from the bottom of her divine heart, but she was just as lost on how to proceed as I was. Even the gods have limits. Otherwise. they would not need humans to keep the sun alive. The world above belongs to mortals, and its fate will remain in mortal hands. I breathed the chilly air of Mictlan and fought to regain my composure. In my hands, and the few I can convince to fight with me. Much like Nanahuatzin, all I could do was remain resolute in the face of danger and push on anyway. I had done so on the night of the Scarlet Moon, and I would do so again. “I shall disrupt this ritual before it reaches completion,” I swore to the goddess. “One way or another.” The queen met my eyes again, though the light in them flickered weakly. “I cannot offer insight on how to extinguish the sulfur flame, but I can tell you this, Iztac—even the strongest lie eventually yields to the simplest truth. No matter how powerful your enemies appear, remember that their rule is built on weak foundations.” “I shall keep your advice in mind.” For all the good it would do. “I promise.” I would also make sure neither Nanahuatzin’s memory nor even Tecciztecatl’s would be sacrificed on the First Emperor’s altar. No matter their reasons, both had given their souls to bring mankind light. I would not let them be forgotten for the profit of a vampiric usurper. “It is time for me to go,” I whispered with a heavy heart. “I only have a few hours of sleep left.” “The doors to Tlalocan await you underground.” The goddess’s skeletal teeth morphed into what could pass for a sad smile. “We shall meet again, Iztac, on the Day of the Dead.” If I lived that long… “I shall provide a suitable priestess,” I humbly promised. “I already have my sights on potential candidates.” Necahual seemed like the best choice for a priestess, followed closely by Sigrun, if I could convince them to go along with it. “Much will have changed by then, but I can tell that you will deliver.” Queen Mictecacihuatl put a hand on her heart and waved it at mine. I recognized it as a humble gesture of goodbye. “You have my blessing on your journey, Iztac.” I knelt and offered her my warmest thanks. I would miss her greatly. I had the feeling the gods I would meet below would prove far less pleasant. It took me hours of preparation and paying a dead merchant with unforgettable illusions—he had asked for a full night’s worth against his Macetail carrying frame, to which I haggled down the duration—but I finally descended into Mictlan’s depths well and fully prepared. I walked down bone-stairs with a mask of Tlaloc on my face and blue body paint all over my flesh and bones. My back bent under the weight of the heavy armored carrying frame and its contents—my second volume of the First Emperor’s codices, the urn Chalchiuhtlicue asked me to deliver to her husband, and other supplies that should help me brave Tlalocan’s incendiary landscape. I should be able to avoid the worst of the second layer’s hazards by combining my disguise with a well-crafted Veil. All in all, I was as prepared for the next step of my journey as I would ever be. Mictlan’s bowels opened up before me and led to the Gate of Torment. The doorway to Tlalocan hadn’t changed since my last visit. The obsidian archway leading to the second layer awaited me with pulsing flames and blazing flashes of crimson lightning. A golden tumi floated in front of it. If I still had a beating heart inside my chest rather than a searing flame, I would have had a stroke on the spot. Instead, I immediately triggered my Gaze spell while summoning the Doll’s talons, ready for yet another fight… Only for the mask to disappear before my sunlit eyes. “Awww!” A familiar trickster raged from one of the chamber’s corners. “That’s cheating!” That voice. I immediately recognized the bastard to which it belonged. Impossible. He said he didn’t want to see me again. In spite of all reason, here he was, waiting for me with other guests. Huehuecoyotl hadn’t changed a bit since I last had the displeasure of encountering him. He still radiated the same empty bravado and insolence he showed in all our interactions, lazily leaning against Tlalocan’s archway as if it were normal furniture rather than a window into an underground hellscape. He wasn’t alone either. Xolotl was also present, alongside two familiar skeletons I could never forget. After all, I had saved their afterlives. “Ueman? Chipahua?” I could hardly believe my eyes. “Is that you—AH!” I had almost forgotten the sensation of Xolotl’s jaws closing on my arm. I did not miss it, though. Huehuecoyotl held his empty rib cage as he laughed at my pain while Ueaman and his sister exchanged an embarrassed glance. “Do you, uh…” Ueman scratched the back of his skull. A futile gesture since he had no hair left, but living habits die hard. “Need help?” “No, it’s fine,” I said while gritting my teeth. Xolotl actually released his grip a bit earlier than usual. “Was that truly necessary?” “I am entitled to chew your flesh and bones each time you visit the first layer,” Xolotl reminded me. “Did you think you could escape without paying good Xolotl’s due?” No. No, I definitely did not. But still, I was surprised to find him waiting for me at Tlalocan’s threshold with company. I assumed Xolotl wanted to remind me of our second deal and the message I had to deliver to his brother Quetzalcoatl, but the others had no stake in my departure. One in particular had made his displeasure with me known. “Why are you here, Huehuecoyotl?” I asked the trickster as he finally calmed down. What was his game? “I thought you never wanted to see me again?” “I stand by what I said. Your heart is full of hate, and its light will bring naught but destruction to the living.” Huehuecoyotl shrugged his shoulders. “But you know me. I’m a playful man. I always bet against the odds.” I squinted at him, unsure how I should take this. I thought he would ask me a favor, or laugh at me, but he did neither of these things. It took me a while to realize he had no ulterior motives, or at least none that I could identify. “Are you here to tell me farewell?” I asked, utterly flabbergasted. “Well, you did declare your undying love to me atop a giant spire.” Huehuecoyotl smirked at me as he dared to remind me of that particular fiasco, the shameless bastard. “It would be uncouth of me not to tell you goodbye, little bird that you are. Not after the passionate night we spent together.” “Brother, what is he talking about?” Poor Chipahua asked her brother while I fought back the urge to strangle Huehuecoyotl where he stood. “You will understand when you’re old—” Ueman suddenly stopped himself before he could say something terribly stupid to his dead sister. “I will tell you another day.” “We did not…” My protests died in my throat when I heard Huehuecoyotl’s cackling. That wily trickster delighted in embarrassing me, so I decided to deny him. “Whatever. I don’t care.” “We didn’t break up on the best terms,” Huehuecoyotl lied to the other undead. “How surprising,” Xolotl replied with heavy sarcasm. Clearly, he too had suffered from the coyote’s pranks. “I wait for the day someone will scrap you with great expectations.” I cursed myself for my stupidity. Of course Huehuecoyotl had an ulterior motive. He wanted to laugh at me one last time. I would have been furious under other circumstances, but to my surprise, I couldn’t muster the strength to be mad at him. If anything, I felt… strangely pleased. The same way I had been after losing a splash fight with Eztli near the river or playing that tumi game with Nenetl. I had forgotten what it meant to have fun. “It’s been a while, Great Iztac,” Ueman said as he found the courage to greet me. His sister, Chipahua, nodded sweetly at me. “Lord Xolotl informed us that you intended to leave Mictlan, so we insisted that we attend your departure.” Xolotl informed them? I glanced at the dog god, who scratched his back rather than face me. “Much has happened since we last met, and I must take my leave of this gray city,” I conceded to Ueman. “But please, stop calling me ‘great.’ Iztac will do fine.” “I-I’m afraid I can’t do that.” Ueman shook his head in denial. “We do owe you our afterlives. I do not want to sound disrespectful.” “Fine,” I replied with a heavy sigh upon realizing he wouldn’t budge on the matter. “How have you been since we last crossed paths?” “All is good. We were sorted with our ancestors, with whom we share a house.” Ueman let out a chuckle. “It is a bit strange to talk with grandparents we never met in life, but they dote on my sister.” Good for them. They had earned a peaceful rest after spending decades trapped in the Underworld’s mists. Chipahua approached me and raised her skeletal hands at me. A small trinket shone within them—a rainbowy snail’s shell. Pretty, if a bit tarnished by time and slightly cracked. “For you,” Chipahua whispered shyly. “Chipahua found it near the lake of tears outside the city walls,” Ueman said. “We know it’s not much, great and powerful Iztac, but we hope you will appreciate this gift.” “I do,” I said, touched by the gesture. I took the shell into my palm as if it were a precious treasure. “It is pretty.” “It is marvelous,” Huehuecoyotl commented with a salesman’s enthusiasm. “A captured rainbow shining like the sun!” It shone even more since it came without expectations, unlike the gifts I received above ground. This shell might not be a magical tablet or a pet Feathered Tyrant, but I would value it more than the others for what it represented. Gratitude. There were people worth helping in this harsh world of ours. “Thank you,” I told Ueman and his sister after storing the seashell in my carrying frame with my other precious possessions. “I shall carry it with me to the Underworld’s depths.” “A bold promise,” Xolotl commented with some cynicism, while Huehuecoyotl crossed his arms with an enigmatic look on his canine face. “No, great Iztac, we thank you for your kindness and bravery.” Ueman and his sister bowed before me. “We shall pray for your success on your journey.” I offered them a final nod of respect and bade them farewell as well. I stepped toward Tlalocan’s threshold, facing the smoldering hellscape beyond it. “Remember our promise,” Xolotl said. “I shall,” I replied. “Until we meet again.” I took one last breath and then stepped forward. The veil separating the first layer from the next was no thicker than a scroll of paper. I faced no resistance, no pushback. In fact, I fell through the entire portal the moment I touched it with my hand. My body, my soul, my very essence was called through the gate in the blink of an eye. I felt the change within the very depths of my soul. A weight that fell not on my body, but my spirit. I sensed the familiar and terrifying presence of King Mictlantecuhtli watching over me, like the guardian of a gate granting me passage. The death god offered me no farewell nor blessing. His almighty voice instead echoed in my skull one final time to impress a last warning in my thoughts. “Do not become what you fight against.” I crossed the passage, abandoning Mictlan’s cold for Tlalocan’s heat. No words could properly describe the latter. I felt as if I had walked into an oven—no, a bonfire. I stepped onto ashes warmer than the Nightlords’ pile of them inside my palace and faced a storm of cinders blown by howling winds onto my face. The blue paint and mask I wore repelled them before they could flay the flesh from my bones, but I still felt the terrible heat nonetheless. The noise of booming thunder erupted above me where once there was only silence. A thick smell of sulfur filled my nostrils alongside old dust and primeval ashes. The underground ceiling of bones gave way to a smoke-filled whirlpool of clouds dominated by Tlaloc’s baleful sun. A landscape of molten rivers and desolate spires sprawled before me, an invitation to desolation. Though I couldn’t see them yet, I knew the Burning Men haunted these ruins, waiting to strike. I immediately called upon the Veil to hide myself under a cloak of illusions, to no avail. An overwhelming will blew away my disguise like the wind did to a sandcastle. The light of Tlaloc’s sun crushed my illusion under the weight of denial and disbelief. “A clever plan,” a woman’s voice echoed behind me, high and mighty. “But one that was doomed from the very beginning.” I froze in shock and surprise. I’d only heard that voice in passing, whispered to me by the Yaotzin, when it revealed Necahual’s darkest secret to me… and whom she feared the most. I slowly turned around, the carrying frame heavy on my back, my Doll spell ready to fire at the first sign of danger. A copy of the Gate of Torment stood behind me, surrounded by a desert of dust. The obsidian archway was empty, with no door to Mictlan opened within its confines. As forewarned, this was a one-way trip. A giant black owl was perched atop the gate, her icy blue eyes studying me. I faced a reflection of my own Tonalli, but bigger, more experienced, and deadlier as well. “Tlaloc’s sun burns away the lies that caused him distress,” she said calmly. “Your Veil spell is useless on this layer’s surface. You will have to bear his fury or that of his victims.” I did not answer. She didn’t mind. She stepped down from her perch and transformed midfall. Her talons became feet before they hit the ground. I faced a middle-aged woman with long white hair and a dress of blackened feathers. A dark wooden mask covered the upper part of her face, revealing only two blue lights for eyes. A purple flame even darker than mine burned inside her exposed ribs. I stared at my twisted mirror—my forgotten past and possible future. “Welcome home, my son,” my mother greeted me. Ichtaca. Mother of witches and Mictlan’s greatest criminal. The one who had given birth to me, both to my human flesh and the owl-soul I would later become. A flood of conflicting emotions burst out from within me. Joy at seeing a family member alive, even one I had never truly known; a gaping emptiness left from growing up without a mother; abandonment issues I had spent years suppressing; anger at her departure; caution for her history of crimes; and fear of what she had done with my father’s soul. I stood still as so many thoughts waged a battle within my soul. Was a similar conflict taking place within my mother’s mind? Her face was a mask, her eyes unreadable. I noticed her fingers slightly twitch now and then, though I couldn’t tell whether it was out of emotion or wariness. Did she expect us to hug or fight? I activated the Gaze spell, just in case. My sunlight-fueled eyes pierced through no illusion. My mother had come to me without hiding anything. It reassured me, but not enough to lower my guard. “How long have you been waiting?” I finally asked, my fists tightened and all my senses alert for any sign of danger. “Since the day you were born.” A proud smile formed on her lips. “I knew you would grow into a Nahualli the moment the midwife dragged you screaming into the world. I had hoped the owl-totem would select you as its Tlacatecolotl, but I couldn’t be sure.” “You could have found out earlier if you hadn’t abandoned me and Father!” My blood boiled with anger. “Instead, you left us to suffer alone!” Her smile faded away. “Do you think I wanted to?” Though she did not raise her tone, Mother sounded almost as angry as I was. “Leaving you and Itzili behind was by far the hardest decision I had to make in my entire life.” “Then why?!” “Because I had no choice,” she insisted angrily, stressing the last part. “The Nightlords were onto me and desired to add me to their sick imperial breeding program. They would have made me a concubine or consort had I not fled into the night. Those parasites wish to breed Nahualli like we do turkeys.” I wanted to believe her. I desperately wanted to believe her. That, there, had been a completely rational reason that explained why she had abandoned her family without ever bothering to contact me again. But for all of my heart’s desire, she was a stranger to me. A ghost I had resented and idealized at different times of my life, yet never truly known except through the tales of her cruelty. “If you cared, you would have taken Father and me along,” I accused her. “Or at least sent a message.” “I had to flee on short notice. I considered contacting you many times, Iztac, but the red-eyed priests would have used you as a hostage if I ever tried.” My mother crossed her arms. “Distancing myself from you was the only way to let them ignore your existence. To give you a chance at a better life.” A better life? A better life?! “A better life?! Look at me!” I pointed at my eyes, at my owl mask. “Look at me!” She held my gaze in silence. “How could you look at my eyes and hair and think I would ever have a better life than literally anyone else?!” I accused her. “You were there with Father on the day I was born! The day when the soothsayer condemned a cursed freak before our entire village!” “They were mundanes,” she answered with a touch of arrogant disdain, “and forbidden to slay you. What could they have done to you?” A bitter laugh escaped my mouth. “Mock me for a start,” I rasped angrily. “And beat me, and starve me, and stone me, and throw shit at me, and slap me, and shun me⁠—” “Good.” Her cold answer hit me harder than a slap to the face. “Good?” I repeated weakly, more shocked than anything. “Good.” She glared at me with ice in her eyes and in her heart. “You think a parent’s duty is to coddle their child? No, Iztac. A parent’s duty is to prepare their child to face reality. A reality that is cold and merciless, where the weak suffer as they must and the strong constantly look over their shoulder, where pain is common and kindness preciously rare.” She took a step toward me, her forehead within inches of mine. “So yes, all the suffering you went through was for the best,” she said with confidence that bordered on the frightening. “Because it taught you how it feels to be weak; that nothing is ever given, only claimed by strength, cunning, and force of will. It is only when the body is battered that it grows a backbone.” “The best?” I glared back at her in fury and disbelief. “How dare you⁠—” “You wouldn’t be here otherwise,” she cut in, her words as sharp as a knife’s edge. “Instead, you would have wallowed in the palace’s pleasures or stepped away from the knife that would have awakened your power. You would never have defied the gods themselves and passed through this threshold. Pain is the anvil on which the human heart is forged.” The worst part was that she sounded as if she believed each and every word. Empty excuses were not spoken with such unblinking conviction. My mother truly believed that abandoning me to sixteen years of sorrow made her a good parent. She was just as bad as Yoloxochitl, except in the other direction. “I am proud of what you accomplished through your grit and bravery,” my mother whispered, though it came off as empty after all that she had said earlier. “And now that you have stepped beyond Mictlantecuhtli’s reach, I can help you.” “Like you helped me by surrendering me to Necahual’s embrace?” I snorted. “I’ll pass.” “I am sincere.” My mother looked at my chest with what could pass for regret, feigned or otherwise. “I’d hoped the Nightlords would leave you and your father alone since they mostly target women, but I should have known they would select a Nahualli this year. They need one to raise their twilight sun in the sky.” I squinted, my surprise temporarily overcoming my anger. “Their twilight sun?” My mother opened her mouth to elaborate when a horrifying, inhuman howl echoed in the distance. A scream full of rage and suffering. “We can discuss the past and how to break your curse in Xibalba,” Mother said. “We will be safer there than in the open.” “I’m not going anywhere with you.” “Itzili is waiting for you there too.” The mention of my father’s name shook me to my core. I did not dare address the subject yet, since I feared for his soul… My mother tilted her head to the side. “You do not trust me.” I stifled a bitter laugh. “No, I do not.” “Fair. Let me give you a choice then.” My mother straightened up, the ashes flowing over her feathered dress like water on a turtle’s scales. “You can continue your journey as it is, fighting your way through the rains of cinders and the Burning Men’s arrows. It will be dangerous, especially for an untrained warlock like you. You have barely tapped into your true potential, my child. It might be enough to survive long enough to meet with Tlaloc and obtain his benediction. Your chances are slim, but they are not nonexistent.” I was prepared. As best as I could be in a week’s time. But she was right—it would be dangerous. I clenched my jaw, fought back the urge to argue, and forced myself to listen for the time being. “Or, you use your reason,” my mother said. “You come with me to Xibalba and meet with your father. There, I shall teach you properly. I will show spells you can hardly imagine and rituals that will help you defeat the slavers who have leashed your soul. I will show you how deep the abyss of magic goes. When you resume your journey, you will be better than prepared. You will be ready.” She had rehearsed these words the moment I crossed the archway. I could tell. The conversation hadn’t gone the way she wanted, but it reached its intended destination nonetheless. “So what will it be, my son?” My mother extended a hand to me. “Will you give me a chance to make up for lost time?” My first instinct was to spit on her palm. But I had had a week of practice forcing myself to think rationally in the face of great evils. Though my heart was a maelstrom, I tried to consider her proposal with a cool head. I didn’t have the luxury of making more enemies than those I had already accumulated. I had agreed to look beyond Necahual’s abuse, so the least I could do was give my own mother a chance. If only to keep her out of my way. I couldn’t look past her dark reputation, however—our discussion clearly showed me that she lived up to the tales. Her invitation could be a trap… But what would it change? I had planned to go to Xibalba to check on my father’s soul anyway. Mother would be waiting for my arrival one way or another. Besides, she held answers to my questions. About magic, about the Nightlords’ plans, and about my totem’s secrets. If she indeed offered to treat me as a student rather than an intruder, then… then I would have to bite my tongue. I needed all the power and allies I could obtain to overthrow the Nightlords. Now more than ever. “If this is a trap—” I said, but she didn’t let me finish. “You will leave, I know. You have no need to worry.” Another smile flashed on her face, warm yet with a somewhat sinister edge to it. “Another thing before we fly away.” She transformed back into an owl of darkness, her great wings casting a dark shadow on the archway behind her. “How do you feel,” she asked, ever so softly, “about becoming a god?” Blood and Fur will continue in The Fire Dawn! part0030. THANK YOU FOR READING THE LAST EMPEROR We hope you enjoyed it as much as we enjoyed bringing it to you. We just wanted to take a moment to encourage you to review the book. Follow this link: The Last Emperor to be directed to the book’s Amazon product page to leave your review. Every review helps further the author’s reach and, ultimately, helps them continue writing fantastic books for us all to enjoy. Also in series: The Last Emperor The Fire Dawn Check out the series here! (Tap or scan) Want to discuss our books with other readers and even the authors? Join our Discord server today and be a part of the Aethon community. Facebook | Instagram | Twitter | Website You can also join our non-spam mailing list by visiting www.subscribepage.com/AethonReadersGroup and never miss out on future releases. You'll also receive three full books completely Free as our thanks to you. Looking for more great LitRPG? Check out our new releases! part0031. A magical new world. An ancient power. A chance to be a Hero. Danny Kendrick was a down-on-his luck performer who always struggled to find his place. He certainly never wanted to be a hero. He just hoped to earn a living doing what he loved. That all changes when he pisses off the wrong guy and gets transported to another world. Stuck in a fantasy realm straight out of a Renaissance Fair, Danny quickly discovers that there's more to life. Like magic, axe-wielding brutes, super hot elf assassins, and a talking screen that won't leave him alone. He'll need to adapt fast, turn on the charm, and get stronger if he hopes to survive this dangerous new world. But he has a knack for trouble. Gifted what seems like an innocent ancient lute after making a questionable deal with a Hag, Danny becomes the target of mysterious factions who seek to claim its power. It's up to him, Screenie, and his new barbaric friend, Curr, to uncover the truth and become the heroes nobody knew they needed. And maybe, just maybe, Danny will finally find a place where he belongs. Don't miss the start of this isekai LitRPG Adventure filled with epic fantasy action, unforgettable characters, loveable companions, unlikely heroes, a detailed System, power progression, and plenty of laughs. From the minds of USA Today bestselling and Award-winning duo Rhett C Bruno & Jaime Castle, An Expected Hero is perfect for fans of Dungeon Crawler Carl, Kings of the Wyld, and This Trilogy is Broken! Get An Unexpected Hero now! part0032. He thought he was ready for the apocalypse. Then it happened... A Secret Service operative and dedicated survivalist, Special Agent Del Roosevelt had a plan for every world-ending scenario, and regularly trained for them all. But all that training, all those rations, all that prepping? Useless for the apocalypse that actually played out. Del wakes up half buried in a giant trash pile, missing his thumbs. And, um, covered in red fur. He’s stuck in a world of fuzzy monsters, senseless violence, and cult-like crusaders. He knows he’s got to get to the top of the tower he’s in to find the wizard who presumably turned him into a living toy. Will the help of an academic rat and an exiled little dinosaur get him there? Doubtful. But in all his failing, Del starts to realize how ridiculous his life as a prepper actually was. After all, what’s the point in surviving if you have no one to live for? Master of Puppets is the first book in an all-new LitRPG Adventure by Eric Ugland, bestselling author of The Good Guys. Strap in for an immersive adventure full of quests, powerful magic, tower climbing, leveling up, wise-cracking landlords, and murderous cookies. Get Master of Puppets Now! part0033. Betrayed by his guild... Left for dead... He must become stronger than they ever imagined. Ever since Arwin was summoned as a child, all he has known is war. And now, to claim the demon queen's life and end the war, he has to sacrifice himself. But, as he deals the final blow, the Hero of Mankind is betrayed. Caught in a magical explosion thought to end him, Arwin awakens a month later to find that everyone has already moved on. His [Hero] class has changed to a unique blacksmith Class called [The Living Forge] that is empowered by consuming magical items, but some of his old passive [Titles] remain, giving him the power to forge his new future exactly the way he wants to. Arwin isn't going to settle for anything less than completely surpassing the powers he wielded as the Hero. After all, you are what you eat – and Arwin’s diet just became legendary. Don't miss the next epic LitRPG Saga from Actus, bestselling author of Return of the Runebound Professor. With nearly 7-million views on Royal Road, this definitive edition is perfect for fans of Seth Ring, Jonathan Brooks, Michael Chatfield and lovers of all things Progression Fantasy and Crafting. About the Series: Features a healthy mix of crafting and combat, a strong-to-stronger MC, power progression, a detailed magic system, item enchantment, smithing, unforgettable characters, and much more! Get Rise of the Living Forge Now! part0034. For all our LitRPG books, visit our website. part0035. THANKS & AFTERWORDS Thanks to my proofreaders Daniel Zogbi and Charles Setser for their support and wise advice, and special thanks to my patrons on Patreon at https://www.patreon.com/VoidHerald, who helped me make that book possible. I hope you’ve enjoyed this dark dive into the world of Mesoamerican mythology. Blood & Fur was heavily inspired by Aztec, Maya, Olmec, and Inca myths, which I feel are somewhat underrepresented in modern fantasy. With luck, this novel will have awakened some interest in the matter. This volume was designed as a sort of “introduction” to the world of Blood & Fur, with the serious matters beginning with the next volume; as in, more power and spellcasting progression, more eldritch rituals and deadly politics, and of course, the beginning of the Sapa-Yohuachanca war. Expect many twists and turns. I hope to see you in the next volume. Best regards, Maxime/Voidy. part0036. GROUPS Don’t forget to join LitRPG Addicts and come hang out with me! I’m also very active and thankful for Redditserials, LitRPG Books, GameLit Society, Western Cultivation Stories (Xianxia and Wuxia, etc), Cultivation novels, LitRPG & GameLit Readers, and LitRPG Books Group! part0037. To learn more about LitRPG, talk to authors including myself, and just have an awesome time, please join the LitRPG Group 